LABORATORY LIFE
This page intentionally left blank
LABORATORY LIFE
The Construction of
Scientific Facts
Bruno Latour · Steve Woolgar
Introduction by Jonas Salk

With a new postscript and index by the authors




PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS
PRINCETON, NEW JERSEY
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, Chichester, West Sussex
Copyright © 1979 by Sage Publications, Inc.
Copyright © 1986 by Princeton University Press
All rights reserved


LCC 85-43378

ISBN 0-692-09418-7
Princeton University Press books are printed on acid-free paper, and meet the guidelines for
permanence and durability of the Committee on Production Guidelines for Book Longevity
of the Council on Library Resources



Disclaimer:
Some images in the original version of this book are not
available for inclusion in the eBook.
                                   CONTENTS


Preface to Second Edition                                       7
Acknowledgements                                               9
Introduction by Jonas Salk                                     11

1   FROM ORDER TO DISORDER                                     15
    The Observer and the Scientist                             19
    The Social and the Scientific: A Participant's Resource   21
    The Social and the Scientific: The Observer's Dilemma     23
    The "Anthropology" of Science                             27
    The Construction of Order                                 33
    Materials and Methods                                     39
    The Organisation of the Argument                          40
    Notes                                                     42


2   AN ANTHROPOLOGIST VISITS THE LABORATORY                   43
    Literary Inscription                                      45
    The Culture of the Laboratory                             53
         Articles about Neuroendocrinology                    54
         The "Phenomenotechnique"                             63
    Documents and Facts                                       69
         The Publication List                                 72
         Statement Types                                      75
         The Transformation of Statement Types                81
    Conclusion                                                86
    Notes                                                     88
Photograph File                                               91

3   THE CONSTRUCTION OF A FACT: THE CASE OF TRF(H)            105
    TRF(H) in Its Different Contexts                          107
    The Delineation of a Subspecialty: The Isolation and
      Characterisation of TRF(H)                              112
    A Choice of Strategies                                    114



                                                                5
6                                                               LABORATORY LIFE

    The Elimination of Concurrent Efforts by New Investments                119
    The Construction of a New Object                                        124
    The Peptidic Nature of TRF                                              129
    Narrowing Down the Possibilities                                        142
    TRF Moves into Other Networks                                           148
    Notes                                                                   149


4   THE MICROPROCESSING OF FACTS                                            151
    The Construction and Dismantling of Facts in Conversation               154
    The Sociological Analysis of "Thought Processes"                        168
    Facts and Artefacts                                                     174
    Notes                                                                   184


5   CYCLES OF CREDIT                                                        187
    Credit: Reward and Credibility
         What Motivates Scientists?                                         189
         Limitations of the Notion of Credit as Reward                      192
         The Quest for Credibility                                          194
         Conversion from One Form of Credibility to Another                 198
         The Demand for Credible Information                                201
    Strategies, Positions and Career Trajectories
         Curriculum Vitae                                                   208
         Positions                                                          211
         Trajectories                                                       214
         Group Structure                                                    216
         Group Dynamics                                                     223
    Notes                                                                   230


6   THE CREATION OF ORDER OUT OF DISORDER                                   235
    Creating a Laboratory: The Main Elements of Our Argument                236
    Order From Disorder                                                     244
    A New Fiction for Old?                                                  252
    Notes                                                                   258

References                                                                  263

Postscript to Second Edition (1986)                                         273
   How Radical is Radical?                                                  277
   What Does It Mean to be Ethnographic?                                    277
   The Place of Philosophy                                                  279
   The Demise of the "Social"                                               281
   Reflexivity                                                              282
   Conclusion                                                               284
   Notes                                                                    285
Additional References                                                       287
Index                                                                       291
              P R E F A C E T O SECOND EDITION


The most substantial change to the first edition is the addition of an extended
postscript in which we set out some of the reactions to the book's first publication in the light of developments in the social study of science since
1979. The postscript also explains the omission of the term "social" from
this edition's new subtitle. Other minor additions include a detailed Table
of Contents, Additional References, and an Index. Readers tempted to conclude that the main body of the text replicates that of the original are advised
to consult Borges (1981).
  Wolvercote, August 1985




                                                                               7
                To The Salk Institute

"If sociology could not be applied in a thorough going
way to scientific knowledge, it would mean that science
could not scientifically know itself."
                                        -Bloor (1976)

"Méfiez-vous de la pureté, c'est le vitriol de l'àme."
                             -M. Tournier (Vendredi)
              ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


The field research which forms the basis for the discussion in this volume
was carried out by the first author. A Fulbright Fellowship (1975-1976), a
NATO Fellowship (1976-1977), and a special grant from the Salk Institute
financed the field research. Special thanks are due to Professor Roger Guillemin and his group, who made the field work possible. Subsequent writing
was financially assisted by PAREX, the Maison des Sciences de l'Homme
and by Brunei University. It is a pleasure to acknowledge all those sources
and to thank those who have taken the trouble to read sections of the work
and make helpful criticisms.




                                                                         9
This page intentionally left blank
                    INTRODUCTION


Scientists often have an aversion to what nonscientists say about
science. Scientific criticism by nonscientists is not practiced in the
same way as literary criticism by those who are not novelists or poets.
The closest one comes to scientific criticism is through journalists who
have had an education in science, or through scientists who have
written about their own personal experiences. Social studies of science
and philosophy of science tend to be abstract or to deal with wellknown historical events or remote examples that bear no relationship
to what occurs daily at the laboratory bench or in the interactions
between scientists in the pursuit of their goals. In addition, journalistic
or sociological accounts seem sometimes to have the sole purpose of
proving merely that scientists are also human.
  A love-hate relationship exists toward scientists in some segments
of society. This is evident in accounts that deal with facets ranging
from tremendously high expectations of scientific studies to their cost
and their dangers-all of which ignore the content and process of
scientific work itself. In the name of "science policy," studies of
scientific activity by economists and sociologists are often concerned
with numbers of publications and with duplication of effort. While
such examinations are of some value, they leave much to be desired
because, in part, the statistical tools are crude and these exercises are
often aimed at controlling productivity and creativity. Most importantly, they are not concerned with the substance of scientific thought
and scientific work. For these reasons, scientists are not drawn to read
what outsiders have to say about science and much prefer the views of
scientists about scientific endeavors.
   However, the present book is somewhat different from accounts
usually written by nonscientists about science. It's based on a two-

                                                                       11
12                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


year study by a young French philosopher which was carried out at
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies and which was subsequently
 written up in collaboration with an English sociologist. Although I
was not responsible for the initial invitation, I welcomed the opportunity to see if the approach that was contemplated would remedy
 some of the shortcomings of previous social studies of science.
   The approach chosen by Bruno Latour was to become part of a
laboratory, to follow closely the daily and intimate processes of
scientific work, while at the same time to remain an "inside" outside
observer, a kind of anthropological probe to study a scientific
"culture"-to follow in every detail what the scientists do and how and
what they think. He has cast what he observed into his own concepts
and terms, which are essentially foreign to scientists. He has translated
the bits of information into his own program and into the code of this
profession. He has tried to observe scientists with the same cold and
unblinking eye with which cells, or hormones, or chemical reactions
are studied-a process which may evoke an uneasy feeling on the part
of scientists who are unaccustomed to having themselves analyzed
from such a vantage point.
   The book is free of the kind of gossip, innuendo, and embarrassing
stories, and of the psychologizing often seen in other studies or
commentaries. In this book the authors demonstrate what they call the
"social construction" of science by the use of honest and valid
examples of laboratory science. This in itself is an achievement for
they are, in a sense, laymen to laboratory science and are not expected
to grasp its fundamentals, but merely expected to comprehend only
that which is easiest to understand, such as the superficial aspects of
laboratory life.
   In reading this book about my colleagues who have been observed
under a sociologist's microscope, I realized how "scientific" a study of
science could be when viewed by an outsider who felt impelled to
imitate the scientific approach he observed. The authors' tools and
concepts are crude and qualitative, but their will to understand
scientific work is consistent with the scientific ethos. Their courage,
and even brashness, in this undertaking reminds me of many scientific
endeavors in which nothing stands in the way of the pursuit of an
inquiry. This kind of objective observation by an outsider of scientists
at work, as if they were a colony of ants or of rats in a maze, could be
unbearable. However, this seems not to be so, and for me the most
interesting part of the work and of its outcome, is that Bruno Latour, a
philosopher-sociologist, began a sociological study of biology and
Introduction                                                            13


along the way came to see sociology biologically. His own style of
thought was transformed by our concepts and ways of thinking about
organisms, order, information, mutations, etc. Curiously, instead of
sociologists studying biologists, who in turn are studying life processes
 -in a sort of infinite regression-here are sociologists coming to
recognize that their work is only a subset of our own kind of scientific
activity, which in turn is only a subset of life in the process of
organization.
   The final point, intended to suggest that this book is not unworthy of
the attention of scientists, is in the bridge made between science or
scientists and the rest of society. The word "bridge" is not quite right
and I doubt that it would be acceptable to the authors because they
claim to go much further. One of their main points is that the social
world cannot exist on one side and the scientific world on the other
because the scientific realm is merely the end result of many other
operations that are in the social realm. "Human affairs" are not
different from what the authors call "scientific production," and the
 chief accomplishment they claim is to reveal the way in which "human
aspects" are excluded from the final stages of "fact production." I
have doubts about this way of thinking and, in my own work, find many
details which do not fit this picture, but I am always stimulated by
attempts to show that the two "cultures" are, in fact, only one.
   Whatever objection may be raised about the details and by the
author's arguments, I am now convinced that this kind of direct
examination of scientists at work should be extended and should be
encouraged by scientists themselves in our own best interest, and in the
best interest of society. Science, in general, generates too much hope
and too much fear, and the history of the relationship of scientists and
nonscientists is fraught with passions, sudden bursts of enthusiasm,
and equally sudden fits of panic. If the public could be helped to
understand how scientific knowledge is generated and could understand that it is comprehensible and no more extraordinary than any
other field of endeavor, they would not expect more of scientists than
they are capable of delivering, nor would they fear scientists as much
as they do. This would clarify not only the social position of scientists
in society, but also the public understanding of the substance of
science, of scientific pursuits and of the creation of scientific knowledge. It is sometimes discouraging that although we dedicate our lives
to the extension of knowledge, to shedding light and exemplifying
rationality in the world, the work of individual scientists, or the work of
14                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


scientists in general, is often understood only in a sort of magical or
mystical way.
   Even if we do not agree with the details of this book, or if we find it
slightly uncomfortable or even painful in places, the present work
seems to me to be a step in the right direction toward dissipating the
mystery that is believed to surround our activity. I feel certain that in
the future many institutes and laboratories may well include a kind of
in-house philosopher or sociologist. For myself, it was interesting to
have Bruno Latour in our institute, which allowed him to carry out the
first investigation of this kind of which I am aware and, most
interestingly, to have observed the way in which he, and his approach,
was transformed by the experience. It would be very useful for this
critique itself to be criticized. This would both help the authors (and
other scholars with similar interests and background) to assist scientists
to understand themselves through the mirror provided, and help a
wider public understand the scientific pursuit from a new and different
and rather refreshing point of view.

                                                    -Jonas Salk, M.D.
La Jolla, California
February 1979
Chapter 1




FROM ORDER TO DISORDER




   5 mins. John enters and goes into his office. He says something very
quickly about having made a bad mistake. He had sent the review of a
paper. . . . The rest of the sentence is inaudible.
   5 mins. 30 secs. Barbara enters. She asks Spencer what kind of solvent to
put on the column. Spencer answers from his office. Barbara leaves and goes
to the bench.
   5 mins. 35 secs. Jane comes in and asks Spencer: "When you prepare for
 I.V. with morphine, is it in saline or in water?" Spencer, apparently writing at
his desk, answers from his office. Jane leaves.
   6 mins. 15 secs. Wilson enters and looks into a number of offices, trying to
gather people together for a staff meeting. He receives vague promises. "It's a
question of four thousand bucks which has to be resolved in the next two
minutes, at most." He leaves for the lobby.
   6 mins. 20 secs. Bill comes from the chemistry section and gives Spencer a
thin vial: "Here are your two hundred micrograms, remember to put this code
number on the book," and he points to the label. He leaves the room.
   Long silence. The library is empty. Some write in their offices, some work
by windows in the brighly lit bench space. The staccato noise of typewriting
can be heard from the lobby.
   9 mins. Julius comes in eating an apple and perusing a copy of Nature.
   9 mins. 10 secs. Julie comes in from the chemistry section, sits down on the
table, unfolds the computer sheets she was carrying, and begins to fill in a
sheet of paper. Spencer emerges from his office, looks over her shoulder and

                                                                              15
16                                                          LABORATORY LIFE

says: "hmm, looks nice." He then disappears into John's office with a few
pages of draft.
   9 mins. 20 secs. A secretary comes in from the lobby and places a newly
typed draft on John's desk. She and John briefly exchange remarks about
deadlines.
   9 mins. 30 secs. Immediately following her, Rose, the inventory assistant,
arrives to tell John that a device he wants to buy will cost three hundred
dollars. They talk in John's office and laugh. She leaves.
   Silence again.
   10 mins. John screams from his office: "Hey Spencer, do you know of any
clinical group reporting production of SS in tumour cells?" Spencer yells back
from his office: "I read that in the abstracts of the Asilomar conference, it was
presented as a well-known fact." John: "What was the evidence for that?"
Spencer: "Well, they got an increase in ... and concluded it was due to SS.
Maybe, I'm not sure they directly tested biological activities, I'm not sure."
John: "Why don't you try it on next Monday's bioassay?"
   10 mins. 55 secs. Bill and Mary come in suddenly. They are at the end of a
discussion. "I don't believe this paper," says Bill. "No, it's so badly written.
You see, it must have been written by an M.D." They look at Spencer and
l a u g h , . , (excerpt from observer's notes),

   Every morning, workers walk into the laboratory carrying their lunches in
brown paper bags. Technicians immediately begin preparing assays, setting
up surgical tables and weighing chemicals. They harvest data from counters
which have been working overnight. Secretaries sit at typewriters and begin
recorrecting manuscripts which are inevitably late for their publication
deadlines. The staff, some of whom have arrived earlier, enter the office area
one by one and briefly exchange information on what is to be done during the
day. After a while they leave for their benches. Caretakers and other workers
deliver shipments of animals, fresh chemicals and piles of mail. The total work
effort is said to be guided by an invisible field, or more particularly, by a
puzzle, the nature of which has already been decided upon and which may be
solved today. Both the buildings in which these people work and their careers
are safeguarded by the Institute. Thus, cheques of taxpayers' money arrive
periodically, by courtesy of the N.I.H., to pay bills and salaries. Future
lectures and meetings are at the forefront of people's minds. Every ten minutes
or so, there is a telephone call for one of the staff from a colleague, an editor, or
some official. There are conversations, discussions, and arguments at the
benches: "Why don't you try that?" Diagrams are scribbled on blackboards.
Large numbers of computers spill out masses of print-out. Lengthy data sheets
accumulate on desks next to copies of articles scribbled on by colleagues.
   By the end of the day, mail has been dispatched together with manuscripts,
preprints, and samples of rare and expensive substances packed in dry ice.
Technicians leave. The atmosphere becomes more relaxed and nobody runs
anymore. There are jokes in the lobby. One thousand dollars has been spent
today. A few slides, like Chinese idiograms, have been added to the stockpile;
one character has been deciphered, a miniscule, invisible increment. Minute
hints have dawned. One or two statements have seen their credibility increase
From Order to Disorder                                                        17


(or decrease) a few points, rather like the daily Dow Jones Industrial Average.
Perhaps most of today's experiments were bungled, or are leading their
proponents up a blind alley. Perhaps a few ideas have become knotted
together more tightly.
   A Philippine cleaner wipes the floor and empties the trash cans. It has been
a normal working day. Now the place is empty, except for the lone figure of an
observer. He silently ponders what he has seen with a mild sense of
bewilderment . . . (Observer's Story).

   Since the turn of the century, scores of men and women have
penetrated deep forests, lived in hostile climates, and weathered
hostility, boredom, and disease in order to gather the remnants of socalled primitive societies. By contrast to the frequency of these
anthropological excursions, relatively few attempts have been made to
penetrate the intimacy of life among tribes which are much nearer at
hand. This is perhaps surprising in view of the reception and
importance attached to their product in modern civilised societies: we
refer, of course, to tribes of scientists and to their production of
science. Whereas we now have fairly detailed knowledge of the myths
and circumcision rituals of exotic tribes, we remain relatively ignorant
of the details of equivalent activity among tribes of scientists, whose
work is commonly heralded as having startling or, at least, extremely
significant effects on our civilisation.
   It is true, of course, that in recent years a wide variety of scholars
have turned their attention to science. Frequently, however, their
interest has focused on the large-scale effects of science. There are
now a number of studies of the size and general form of overall
scientific growth (e.g., Price, 1963; 1975), the economics of its
funding (Mansfield, 1968; Korach, 1964), the politics of its support
and influence (Gilpin and Wright, 1964; Price, 1954; Blisset, 1972),
and the distribution of scientific research throughout the world (Frame
et al., 1977). But it is easy to be left with the impression that research
with such macroconcerns has enhanced rather than reduced the
mystery of science. Although our knowledge of the external effects and
reception of science has increased, our understanding of the complex
activities which constitute the internal workings of scientific activity
remains undeveloped. The emphasis on the external workings of
science has been exacerbated by the application of concepts to science
which are peculiar to social scientists of differing persuasions and
theoretical commitments. Rather than making scientific activity more
understandable, social scientists have tended through their use of
highly specialised concepts to portray science as a world apart. A
18                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


plethora of different specialised approaches have variously been
brought to bear on science, such that the resulting overall picture is
largely incoherent. Analyses of citations in scientific papers tend to
tell us little about the substance of the papers; macroanalyses of
science funding remain virtually silent on the nature of intellectual
activity; quantitative histories of scientific development have tended
to overemphasise those characteristics of science which most readily
lend themselves to quantification. In addition, many of these approaches
have too often accepted the products of science and taken them for
granted in their subsequent analysis, rather than attempting to account
for their initial production.
   Our dissatisfaction with these approaches was considerably worsened
by the realisation that very few studies of science have undertaken any
kind of self-appraisal of the methods employed. This is surprising in
that one might automatically expect students of science to be constantly aware of the basis for their pretensions to produce ''scientific"
findings: it might be reasonable to expect scholars concerned with the
production of science to have begun to examine the basis for their own
production of findings. Yet the best works of these scholars remain
mute on their own methods and conditions of production. It can, of
course, be argued that a lack of reflexivity is inevitable in an area which
is still comparatively young, and that excessive attention to methodological issues would detract from the production of badly needed,
albeit preliminary, research findings. But, in fact, the little evidence
available suggests that new research areas do not usually postpone
discussions of methodological issues in favour of the early production
of substantive results. Rather, methodological clarification and discussion take place at an early stage of development (Mulkay et al.,
1975). Perhaps a more plausible explanation of the lack of methodological reflexivity in social studies of science is simply that such an
approach would be inconsistent with the dominance of macroconcerns
noted already. Attention to the details of one's own methodology
would thus constitute an enterprise radically different from concerns
with overall development, or the implications of growth for science
policy and funding.
   Partly as a result of our dissatisfaction, and in an effort both to
penetrate the mystique of science and to provide a reflexive understanding of the detailed activities of working scientists, we decided to
construct an account based on the experiences of close daily contact
with laboratory scientists over a period of two years (see Materials and
Methods below).
From Order to Disorder                                                  19


The Observer and the Scientist
   When an outside observer first expresses interest in the activities of
working scientists, he can expect one of a variety of different reactions.
If he is a fellow professional scientist working in a different field, or if
he is a student working towards final admission into the scientific
profession, the outsider will usually find that his interest is easily
accommodated. Barring any circumstances involving extreme secrecy
or competition between the parties, scientists can react to expressions
of interests by adopting a teaching role. Outsiders can thus be told the
basic principles of scientific work in a field which is relatively strange
to them. However, for outsiders who are completely ignorant of
science and do not aspire to join the ranks of professional scientists, the
situation is rather different. The most naive (and perhaps least
common) reaction is that nonscientific outsiders simply have no
business probing the activities of science. More commonly, although
working scientists realise that a variety of nonscientific outsiders, such
as historians, philosophers, and sociologists can and do have professional interests in science, the precise point of their questions and
observations is a source of some bewilderment. This is understandable
in that working scientists do not normally possess more than outline
knowledge of the principles, theories, methods, and issues at stake
within disciplines other than their own. An observer who declares
himself to be an "anthropologist of science" must be a source of
particular consternation.
   On the one hand, lack of knowledge can lead to marked disinterest in
the reports produced by outsiders about science. A common response
of this kind is that scholarly tracts in social studies of science seem
"rather dull." If nothing else, this kind of comment provides a salient
reminder of the perceived irrelevance for scientists of many social
studies of science. On the other hand, lack of familiarity with
disciplines outside natural science can provoke suspicion. Thus, it is
often assumed that outsiders' interests must focus on the seedier
aspects of scientific life because investigators are seen to be posing
questions which are essentially irrelevant to practical scientific
activity. Consequently, the fodder deemed most appropriate for such
investigators tends to be tales of scandal and intrigue, of behaviour
which fails the usual high standards of scientific enquiry or which is
unethical, of the exchange of great ideas over coffee, or of renowned
acts of genius and various eureka experiences. This is not to suggest
that outsiders necessarily take such information at face value. Never-
20                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


theless, it is clear that the kind of information provided by scientists
will have a significant effect in shaping investigators' reports and that
the information provided depends, in turn, on the nature of the
relationship between scientist and investigator. It is important, therefore, to look briefly at the nature of this relationship and at the way it
may affect the production of reports about science.
   We were fortunate that the discussion in this volume is informed by
research carried out at an institution with an avowedly well-developed
tradition for the cultivation of a wide range of scientific and philosophical interests. In particular, the founders had established the principle
that the institution should house research interests which encompassed a range of "life sciences" well beyond those of mainstream
biology. For example, a department of linguistics was conceived as an
integral part of the institution. Partly as a result of this general
principle, problems of initial access were considerably lessened.
Under the auspices of the head of one particular laboratory, one of us
was given office space for two years in immediate proximity to the day
to day activities of working scientists. However, despite the alleviation
of institutional obstacles to entry, the outside observer remained a
source of some puzzlement for members of the laboratory. What
exactly were his specific motives and objectives in studying the
laboratory?
   It is perhaps tempting for an outside observer to present his interests
in terms of established categories of scholarly investigation, rather
than in a way which might exacerbate participants' curiosity or sense
of suspicion. For example, the label of "historian" or "philosopher"
might be more readily acceptable than either "sociologist" or "anthropologist." The term "anthropologist" is readily associated with the
study of "primitive" or "prescientific" belief systems. The term
"sociologist" gives rise to a plethora of different interpretations, but
essentially it can be seen by the working scientist to concern a range of
phenomena, all of which impinge in some way on matters of social and
political intrigue. Not surprisingly, therefore, the application of the
term "sociology" to a study of scientific activity will be regarded by
many scientists as dealing primarily with all these "nonscientific"
aspects of science. Sociological interest in science thus appears to
concern a variety of behavioural phenomena which fall into a residual
category: these phenomena unavoidably impinge upon scientific
practice by virtue of the fact that scientists are social beings; but they
are essentially peripheral to the practice itself. In this view, social
From Order to Disorder                                                    21


phenomena occasionally make their presence felt in instances of
extreme secrecy, fraud, or on other relatively infrequent occasions. It
is only then that the kernel of scientific logic and procedure is severely
threatened and scientists find their work disrupted by the intrusion of
external factors.

The Social and the Scientific: A Participant's Resource
   A number of sources testify to the prevalence of this conception of
sociology and "things social" among scientists. Firstly, this view is
consistent with the relatively frequent perception by scientists that
sociologists are engaged in some kind of scholarly muckraking. In
response to enquiries from investigators who have declared their lack
of scientific expertise, information is provided which concerns events
essentially external to science. Secondly, a method commonly used by
scientists to fault or cast doubt on the claims of others is to draw
attention to the social circumstances of the production of the claim.
For example, the assertion that

  X observed the first optical pulsar

can be severely undermined by use of the following formulation:

  X thought he had seen the first optical pulsar, having stayed awake three
  nights in a row and being in a state of extreme exhaustion.

In the second version, the inner logic of systematic scientific procedure
has been disrupted by the intrusion of social factors. As we shall see in
more detail in due course, "social factors" here refer both to "staying
awake three nights" as well as to the transformation of a straightforward "observation" into emphasis on the process of "thinking
about seeing something." For the observation to have been successful,
science should have proceeded either in isolation from such "social
factors" or, as is sometimes the case with "great" scientists, in spite of
them. Given the presence of such "social factors," no ordinary
scientist can pursue science successfully. Observations, claims, and
achievements can thus be explained away or faulted by the invocation
of social circumstances. Thirdly, although the invocation of social
circumstances can be used to detract from scientific achievement, it is
also possible to recast social factors as an integral part of routine
22                                                         LABORATORY LIFE


scientific procedure. As a result, the "social factors" in question no
longer appear extraneous to science. Because they are no longer
about the "social," these factors pass beyond the realm of sociological
expertise. For example, in the case of the discovery of pulsars
(Woolgar, 1978), a number of radio astronomy groups complained
that their Cambridge rivals had unduly delayed the release of news of
their discovery. In other words, attempts were made to lessen the
nature of the Cambridge achievement by drawing attention to the way
in which communication about the discovery had been handled. One of
very many commentators made the following double-edged comment:

     The truth is that Hewish and the whole Cambridge group had for several
     months achieved a screen of security and secrecy which, in itself, was
     almost as much of an accomplishment as the discovery itself (Lovell,
     1973:122).

By way of reply to similar criticisms, Cambridge spokesmen claimed
that the need for secrecy was merely part of a normal scientific
process:

  In the long history of science, it has, I think, been regarded as the right of
  an individual or group making a scientific discovery to follow up this
  discovery without any obligation to publish their first preliminary result
  (Ryle, 1975).

The argument here is that what had been regarded as grounds for
casting doubt on the scientificity of Cambridge's conduct, was in fact
integral to the normal process of science. Behaviour dubbed "secretive"
(the term itself was hotly contested by Cambridge participants) was
held to be a normal part of scientific procedure rather than an
extraneous social factor which could be used to fault Cambridge
behaviour. Moreover, several participants argued that because such
behaviour was a normal part of the scientific process, it did not merit
any special attention by sociological outsiders.
   We shall return in due course to a detailed discussion of the use by
scientists of similar procedures in dealing with the circumstances
associated with their activities. But our argument is not just that the
distinction between "social" and "intellectual" is prevalent among
working scientists. More importantly, this distinction provides a
resource upon which scientists can draw when characterising either
their own endeavours or those of others. It is therefore important to
From Order to Disorder                                               23


investigate the nature of this distinction and the way it is used by
scientists. The extent to which the distinction between "social" and
"intellectual" is accepted as unproblematic by observers of science
may have significant consequences for the reports about science which
they produce.

The Social and the Scientific: The Observer's Dilemma
   At one extreme, we can envisage the wholesale adoption by an
observer of the distinction mentioned above. In this case, the observer
holds an assumption that scientific phenomena occupy a realm largely
distinct from that of social phenomena, and that it is only to the latter
that the concepts, procedures, and expertise of sociology can be
applied. As a result, the procedures and achievements central to
scientists' work become largely immune from sociological explanation. Approaches which implicitly adopt this standpoint have been
roundly criticised on several grounds. Rather than repeat these
criticisms in detail, we shall merely outline some of the main critical
themes. Firstly, the decision to concentrate only on "social" rather
than "technical" aspects of science severely limits the range of
phenomena that can be selected as appropriate for study. Put simply,
this means that there is no point in doing sociology of science unless
one can clearly identify the presence of some politician breathing
down the necks of working scientists. Where there is no such obvious
interference by external agencies, it is argued, science can proceed
without the need for sociological analysis. This argument hinges on a
particularly limited notion of the occasional influence of sociopolitical factors; the substance of science proceeds unaffected if such
factors are absent. Secondly, emphasis on "social" in contradistinction to "technical" can lead to the disproportionate selection of events
for analysis which appear to exemplify "mistaken" or "wrong"
science. As we shall show, an important feature of fact construction is
the process whereby "social" factors disappear once a fact is
established. Since scientists themselves preferentially retain (or
resurrect) the existence of "social" factors where things scientific are
thought to have gone wrong, the adoption of the same viewpoint by an
observer will necessarily lead him to the analysis of the way social
factors affect, or have given rise to, "wrong" beliefs. As Barnes (1974)
has argued, however, there is at least a very real need for a symmetrical
approach to the analysis of beliefs (cf., Bloor, 1976). Scientific
24                                                           LABORATORY LIFE


achievements held to be correct should be just as amenable to
sociological analysis as those thought to be wrong. Thirdly, emphasis
on the "social" has led commentators to argue for some redress of an
imbalance: not enough attention is thought to have been paid to the
"technical." For example, Whitley has argued that sociological
interest in science is in danger of turning into a sociology of scientists
rather than a fully fledged sociology of science:

     a separation of the study of producers of certain cultured artifacts, that is
     of science, without reference to the form and substance of science itself
     is mistaken (Whitley, 1972:61).

A fourth source of criticism addresses analyses inspired by Merton's
portrayal of the normative structure of science. Many of these
analyses exemplify sociologists' separation of "social" from "technical." Much criticism concerns the lack of empirical basis for the
ethos of modern science which these analyses outline. It has, for
example, been cogently argued that Merton's norms simply do not
govern the behaviour of scientists in the way he suggests (Mulkay,
1969). More recently, it has been pointed out that the existence of both
norms and counternorms in science (Mitroff, 1974) derives from the
insufficiently critical appraisal by sociologists of scientists' statements to outsiders about their work (Mulkay, 1976). More important
than this criticism of the empirical basis for scientists' norms,
however, is the point that such sociological analyses ignore the
technical substance of science. Even if the norms he specified were
found to be correct, the sociologist might as well be describing a
community of expert fishermen, for all he tells us about the nature or
substance of their activity.
   In an effort to pay more attention to the "technical" rather than the
"social," Mulkay (1969) argues that the body of established knowledge and the associated "cognitive and technical norms" are a more
realistic constraint on scientists' behaviour than are social norms.
Consequently (Mulkay, 1972), scientists are known to be working
within a system largely consistent with Kuhn's (1970) description of
paradigm-bound research. The argument that "technical" factors
merit treatment in the same fashion and to the same extent as do
"social" factors has led to research which emphasises the investigation of parallels between social and intellectual development. It is thus
axiomatic to several contributions in this area that an examination of
cognitive developments should proceed in conjunction with an under-
From Order to Disorder                                                25

standing of "concomitant" social developments. Perhaps the most
obvious example of this formulation is in the work of Mullins (1972;
 1973a; 1973b). Here social processes (for example, the emergence of
"social organisation leaders") are seen to occur in tandem with
developments on the "intellectual side" (for example, a shift between
"defining a position" and "doing studies"). The discussion of social
processes is presented quite separately from the treatment of intellectual developments. In a similar way, models of scientific growth have
frequently presented areas of science as passing through various stages
of development, each of which has attendant social and cognitive
characteristics (Crane, 1972; Mulkay et al., 1975 ). The emphasis here
is on producing "an account which shows some of the connections
between intellectual development and social processes" (Mulkay et
al., 1975: 188).
   The investigation of scientific activity in terms of the connections
between two different aspects of this activity leads to several difficulties. As already mentioned, some sociologists have complained
because the correct balance between the "social" and the "intellectual" has not been achieved. For example, Law (1973) argues that
Mullins (1972) concentrates less on the development of ideas than on
changing network characteristics of a specialty over time (see also
Gilbert, 1976: 200). At the same time, it is partly by virtue of the
distinction between social and intellectual factors that the problem of
causal relationship has arisen: does the formation of social groupings
give rise to the pursuit by scientists of certain intellectual lines of
enquiry, or does the existence of intellectual problems lead to the
creation of social networks of scientists? Some authors avoid attempting
to specify the direction of this causal relationship (Mulkay et al.,
1975). Others have suggested that the direction varies according to the
scientific area under investigation (for example, Edge and Mulkay,
 1976: 382) and that it is a problem requiring further research (for
example, Tobey, 1977: esp. footnote 4).
   The commitment to an understanding of "technical" or "intellectual" issues provides an important challenge to traditional sociological research methods. This challenge has been taken up by Edge
and Mulkay ( 1976), whose study of the emergence of radio astronomy
in Britain provides a comprehensive history of detailed technical
developments. As such, their report is a substantial departure from
earlier sociology of science perspectives. It is interesting, however,
that certain commentators have reviewed the report in terms of the
26                                                         LABORATORY LIFE


relative emphasis given to the "social" and "technical" aspects of
radio astronomy. Crane, for example, has said that the authors'
emphasis on technical history has dwarfed the part of the argument
devoted to theoretical interpretation and that there is a corresponding
lack of adventure in the authors' attempts at generalisation:

     the authors present sociological analyses of some aspects of the
     development of the specialty but even here, as they themselves state,
     their discussion is "at a low level of generality and remains close to the
     empirical data generated in the case study" (Crane, 1977: 28).

For our purposes, an important aspect of the departure from earlier
work stems from the cooperation in producing this report between an
ex-member of a radio astronomy research group and a sociologist.
Such cooperation would seem a sensible prerequisite for all outsiders'
attempts to grapple seriously with the technical details of science.
However, this cooperation is not without its own specific problems.
   Mulkay (1974) argues that the sociological study of science
requires a close examination of its technical culture and hence the
active cooperation of technically competent participants. He also
notes that because outsiders are seldom interested in technical culture
and are usually technically incompetent, the accounts given them by
participants must be treated with considerable caution. Scientists
confronted by an audience of outsiders appear to convey a definite
confusion in their accounts between scientific and historical accuracy.
The relationship between scientist and outsider is highlighted by
Mulkay's remarks on interviews variously conducted by ex-participant,
sociologist and both together. Rapport can be quickly established
between ex-participant and interviewer if the discussion concerns
technical issues similar to those routinely discussed by the interviewee
as part of his day-to-day activity. Discussion of more sociological
issues was generally left until later in the interview and, especially
where both ex-participant and sociologist were present, this exacerbated the interviewee's perception of the sociologist as an outsider.
The interviewee assumed the sociologist to be qualified in areas of
discussion which did not directly bear upon the technical content of his
science.
   These observations of difficulties experienced in the course of
interaction with interviewees further support the idea that scientists
themselves work with a very definite distinction between "social" and
"technical." The same distinction can provide a problem for observers
From Order to Disorder                                               27


in that it raises the question of whether or not an equitable balance has
been reached between the two sides of the dichotomy. This question
remains, despite affirmations that "technical and social issues are
intimately linked" (Mulkay, 1974: 114).
   We should like to argue that it is not necessary to attach particular
significance to the achievement of a "correct" balance between
"social" and "intellectual" factors. This is for two main reasons.
Firstly, as already mentioned, the distinction between "social" and
"technical" factors is a resource drawn upon routinely by working
scientists. Our intention is to understand how this distinction features
in the activities of scientists, rather than to demonstrate that emphasis
on one or the other side of the duality is more appropriate for our
understanding of science. Secondly, our interest in the details of
scientific activity cuts across the distinction between "social" and
"technical" factors. We want to pay attention to "technical" issues in
the sense that the use by scientists of "technical" and "intellectual"
terminology is clearly an important feature of their activity. But we
regard the use of such concepts as a phenomenon to be explained.
More significantly, we view it as important that our explanation of
scientific activity should not depend in any significant way on the
uncritical use of the very concepts and terminology which feature as
part of that activity.


The "Anthropology" of Science
   The focus of our study is the routine work carried out in one
particular laboratory. The majority of the material which informs our
discussion was gathered from in situ monitoring of scientists' activity
in one setting. Our contention is that many aspects of science
described by sociologists depend on the routinely occurring minutiae
of scientific activity. Historic events, breakthroughs and competition
are examples of phenomena which occur over and above a continual
stream of ongoing scientific activities. In Edge's (1976) terms, our
most general objective is to shed light on the nature of "the soft
underbelly of science": we therefore focus on the work done by a
scientist located firmly at his laboratory bench.
   In line with this perspective, a project took shape which we called,
for want of a better term, an anthropology of science. We use this
description to draw attention to several distinctive features of our
approach.1 Firstly, the term anthropology is intended to denote the
28                                                  LABORATORY LIFE

preliminary presentation of accumulated empirical material. Without
claiming to have given an exhaustive description of the activities of all
like-minded practioners, we aim to provide a monograph of ethnographic investigation of one specific group of scientists. We envisaged
a research procedure analogous with that of an intrepid explorer of the
Ivory Coast, who, having studied the belief system or material
production of "savage minds" by living with tribesmen, sharing their
hardships and almost becoming one of them, eventually returns with a
body of observations which he can present as a preliminary research
report. Secondly, as has already been hinted, we attach particular
importance to the collection and description of observations of
scientific activity obtained in a particular setting. By our commitment
to techniques of participant observation we hope to come to terms with
a major problem which have thus far dogged understanding of science.
Recently, there has been a growing dissatisfaction with outside
observers' reliance on scientists' own statements about the nature of
their work. Some participants have themselves argued that printed
scientific communications systematically misrepresent the activity
that gives rise to published reports (Medawar, 1964). 2 In a similar
manner, Watkins ( 1964) complains that the "didactic dead-pan" style
required of scientific reporting creates various difficulties in understanding how science is done. In particular, scientists who eschew the
autobiographical form of reporting make it difficult for readers to
appreciate the programme or context which provide the backdrop to
reported work. Sociologists have noted that similar tendencies cause
particular problems for the sociological understanding of historical
context (Mulkay, 1974; Woolgar, 1976a; Wynne, 1976), although it
is usually held that contradictory interpretations are reconciliable
through sociological explanation (Mulkay, 1976; but see Woolgar,
1976b). These comments on the problems involved in the use of
scientists' accounts find a parallel in discussions of the "craft"
character of science. For example, Ravetz (1973) suggests that the
nature of scientific activity is thoroughly misrepresented by the form of
presentation which is used in the reporting of science. Not only do
scientists' statements create problems for historical elucidation; they
also systematically conceal the nature of the activity which typically
gives rise to their research reports. In other words, the fact that
scientists often change the manner and content of their statements
when talking to outsiders causes problems- both for outsiders' reconstruction of scientific events and for an appreciation of how science is
From Order to Disorder                                                    29


done. It is therefore necessary to retrieve some of the craft character of
scientific activity through in situ observations of scientific practice.
More specifically, it is necessary to show through empirical investigation how such craft practices are organised into a systematic and tidied
research report. In short, how is it that the realities of scientific
practice become transformed into statements about how science has
been done? We regard the prolonged immersion of an outside observer
in the daily activities of scientists as one of the better ways in which this
and similar questions can be answered. This also has the advantage
that our descriptions of scientific activity have emerged as a result of
the observer's experiences in the field. In other words, we have not
chosen consciously to focus predominantly on any one of the technological, historical, or psychological aspects of what is observed. No
attempt was made to delimit the area of competence prior to our
discussion, and there was no prior hypothesis about a concept (or set of
concepts) which might best explain what was to be encountered in the
field. Thirdly, our use of "anthropology" denotes the importance of
bracketing our familiarity with the object of our study. By this we mean
that we regard it as instructive to apprehend as strange those aspects of
scientific activity which are readily taken for granted. It is evident that
the uncritical acceptance of the concepts and terminology used by
some scientists has had the effect of enhancing rather than reducing the
mystery which surrounds the doing of science. Paradoxically, our
utilisation of the notion of anthropological strangeness is intended to
dissolve rather than reaffirm the exoticism with which science is
sometimes associated. This approach, together with our desire to
avoid adopting the distinction between "technical" and "social,"
leads us to what might be regarded as a particularly irreverent
approach to the analysis of science. We take the apparent superiority
of the members of our laboratory in technical matters to be insignificant, in the sense that we do not regard prior cognition (or in the case of
an ex-participant, prior socialisation) as a necessary prerequisite for
understanding scientists' work. This is similar to an anthropologist's
refusal to bow before the knowledge of a primitive sorcerer. For us, the
dangers of "going native" outweigh the possible advantages of ease of
access and rapid establishment of rapport with participants. Scientists
in our laboratory constitute a tribe whose daily manipulation and
production of objects is in danger of being misunderstood, if accorded
the high status with which its outputs are sometimes greeted by the
outside world. There are, as far as we know, no a priori reasons for
30                                                    LABORATORY LI FE


supposing that scientists' practice is any more rational than that of
outsiders. We shall therefore attempt to make the activities of the
laboratory seem as strange as possible in order not to take too much for
granted. Outsiders largely unfamiliar with technical issues may
severely jeopardise their observational acumen by initially submitting
themselves to an uncritical adoption of the technical culture.
   Our particular use of an anthropological perspective on science also
entails a degree of reflexivity not normally evident in many studies of
science. By reflexivity we mean to refer to the realisation that
observers of scientific activity are engaged in methods which are
essentially similar to those of the practioners which they study. Of
course, debates about whether and in what senses the social sciences
can be scientific are the familiar stock-in-trade of many sociologists.
Frequently, however, these debates have hinged on erroneous conceptions of the nature of scientific method culled from philosophers'
partial accounts of the way science is practised. Although, for
example, much has been made of whether social science can (or
should) follow Popper or Kuhn, the correspondence of the descriptions
of science provided by these authors to the realities of scientific
practice is somewhat unclear, to say the least. 3 In our discussion, we
shall sidestep these general issues and instead concentrate on specific
problems which the scientific practitioner and the observer of scientific activity may have in common. This will entail making explicit,
particularly in the latter part of the discussion, our awareness of
certain methodological problems which we face in the construction
and presentation of our discussion.
   We have attempted to meet the above requirements of an anthropological perspective by basing our discussion on the experiences of
an observer with some anthropological training but largely ignorant of
science. By using this approach we hope to shed some light on the
process of production within the laboratory and on the similarities with
the approach of the observer.
   It is unlikely that our discussion will tell working scientists anything
they do not already know. We would not presume, for example, to
reveal hitherto undiscovered facts about the details of scientific work
to the subjects of our study. It is clear (as we show) that most members
of our laboratory would admit to the kinds of craft activities which we
portray. At the same time, however, our description of the way in
which such craft activities become transformed into "statements about
science" might constitute a new perspective on what working scien-
From Order to Disorder                                                 31

tists know to be the case. We anticipate that hackles might rise where
participants hold an obdurate commitment to descriptions of scientific
activity formulated in terms of research reports. Often this commitment stems from the perceived utility of such statements in procuring
funds or claiming other privileges. Objections will thus be forthcoming
where our alternative version of the way science proceeds is seen
potentially to undermine or threaten the securement of privileges. The
investigation of the basis for beliefs or, as is a more accurate
description of the present discussion, of the social construction of
scientific knowledge, is frequently construed as an attempt to cast
doubt on the beliefs or knowledge under study. Analysts often face this
kind of mistaken perception in the sociological study of knowledge (for
example, Coser and Rosenberg, 1964: 667). Our "irreverence" or
"lack of respect" for science is not intended as an attack on scientific
activity. It is simply that we maintain an agnostic position. We should
emphasise, therefore, that we do not deny that science is a highly
creative activity. It is just that the precise nature of this creativity is
widely misunderstood. Our use of creative does not refer to the special
abilities of certain individuals to obtain greater access to a body of
previously unrevealed truths; rather it reflects our premise that
scientific activity is just one social arena in which knowledge is
constructed.
   It might also be objected that the work of the particular laboratory
we have studied is unusual in that it is relatively poor at the intellectual
level; that its activity comprises routinely dull work, which is not
typical of the drama and conjectural daring prevalent in other areas of
scientific work. However, the Nobel Prize for Medicine was awarded
to one of the members of our laboratory in 1977, soon after we began
preparation of this manuscript. If the work of the laboratory is merely
routine, then it is possible to receive what is perhaps the most
prestigious kind of acclaim from the scientific community for the kind
of routine work we portray.
   It is perhaps relatively easy to show the intrusion of social factors in
cases of borderline, controversial science, or where secrecy and
competition are evident. This is because it is precisely in these
situations that scientists can offer evidence of nonscientific or extratechnical interference with their work. As a result, it is tempting in
these cases to explain the occurrence of the "technical" in terms of the
"social." The work of our laboratory, however, constitutes "normal"
science which is relatively free from obvious sociological events. We
32                                                   LABORATORY LIFE

are less tempted, therefore, to try to tease out instances of gossip and
scandal; no sociological muckraking is intended, nor do we claim that
science devoid of such intrigue is unworthy of sociological attention.
   So far we have discussed some ways in which our approach differs
from many traditional sociological interests. In particular, we have
adopted the notion of an anthropological study of science to denote the
particular sense of our conception of the social. We are not concerned
with a sociological analysis in the functionalist tradition which tries to
specify norms governing scientists' behaviour. At the same time, we
want to avoid a perspective which implicitly adopts a distinction
between "social" and "technical" issues, however closely related
these might be said to be. The use of such a distinction can be
dangerous either because it fails critically to examine the substance of
technical issues or because the effects of the social are only apparent in
the more obvious instances of external disruption. More significantly,
the use of this distinction fails to examine its importance as a resource
for scientific activity. In addition, our collection of observations within
the setting has led us to a kind of research primarily concerned with the
details of scientific activity rather than with all-encompassing historical description. Our discussion concerns the social construction of
scientific facts, with the proviso that we use "social" in a special sense
which will become clear in the course of our argument. Obviously, we
want to avoid the simplistic imposition of concepts in our attempts to
make sense of our observations of science. For example, our concern
with the "social" is not confined to those nontechnical observations
amenable to the application of sociological concepts such as norms or
competition. Instead, we regard the process of construction of sense
implied by the application of sociological concepts as highly significant for our own approach. It is this process of construction of sense
which forms the focus of our discussion. As a working definition,
therefore, it could be said that we are concerned with the social
construction of scientific knowledge in so far as this draws attention to
the process by which scientists make sense of their observations.
   Let us recap by using an example to illustrate what we mean by the
process of making sense in the social construction of science.
Sometime in late 1967, Jocelyn Bell, a research student at Cambridge
radio astronomy laboratories, noted the persistent appearance of a
strange section of "scruff on the recorded output from apparatus
designed to produce a sky survey of quasars. This statement is itself a
highly condensed version of an account gleamed from a variety of
From Order to Disorder                                                 33


sources, including discussions with Bell (Woolgar, 1976a). Sociologists
of different persuasions and research styles would undoubtedly view
this episode in a variety of different ways. Those primarily interested
in norms, for example, might enquire how the communication of news
of this finding was handled in the light of prevailing competitive
pressures. To what extent did scientists live up to, or evade, norms of
universality? Such an approach would leave intact the activity
involved in Bell's perception. A more sophisticated approach might
enquire as to the social circumstances prevalent at the time. What
were the constraints in terms of availability of equipment which made
Bell's observation appear remarkable? What were the characteristics
of the organisation of radio astronomy at that stage of its development
that gave Bell's observation a special significance? This approach
would be more sophisticated in the sense that factors such as the
organisation of research at Cambridge and participants' experience of
past disputes would be examined for their influence on the observation
and its subsequent interpretation. Given a different state of affairs, it
could be argued, the observation would have been interpreted differently or might not have occurred at all.
   In this particular example, it might be argued that if scrutiny of the
recording had been automated or if Bell had been sufficiently socialised
into realising that the persistent recurrence of scruff was impossible
and hence nonnoticeable, the discovery of pulsars would have been
much longer in coming. Technical events, such as Bell's observations,
are thus much more than mere psychological operations; the very act
of perception is constituted by prevalent social forces. Our interest,
however, would be in the details of the observation process. In
particular, we should like to know the method by which Bell made
sense of a series of figures such that she could produce the account:
"There was a recurrence of a bit of scruff." The processes which
inform the initial perception can be dealt with psychologically.
However, our interest would be with the use of socially available
procedures for constructing an ordered account out of the apparent
chaos of available perceptions.


The Construction of Order
  Our interest in the way in which scientific order is constructed out of
chaos arises from two main considerations. Firstly, from the fact that
there are always available a number of alternative sociological
34                                                      LABORATORY LIFE


features which might be invoked to explain the occurrence of a
particular scientific action. Because any alternative can in principle be
undermined or faulted, it may be preferable to change the focus so as to
examine the way in which features are invoked so as to produce order.
Secondly, outside observers appear to be in a position essentially
similar to scientists in that they are also confronted with the task of
constructing an ordered account out of a disordered array of observations. By capitalising on the reflexivity of the observer's situation, we
hope to obtain an interesting analytical handle on our understanding of
scientific practice. We shall thus argue that by realising and subsequently examining this essential similarity of method, the observer
can better understand certain details of scientific activity. Let us
elucidate each of these two points in turn.
   The first point can be best demonstrated with the use of an example,
again taken from the development of research on pulsars (Woolgar,
1978). The following utterance was used as part of the analysis of the
reception and controversy stirred up by the initial discovery of pulsars:

     The discovery of the first pulsar was reported in February 1968
     although the discovery itself seems to have been made in about a two-
     month period up to September 1967 (Hoyle, 1975).

On the one hand, this utterance can be used as evidence for the
existence of a complaint that the Cambridge group had somehow
violated scientific protocol by unduly delaying release of news of their
discovery. The time lag between September 1967 and February 1968
is a "noticeable" (and hence noteworthy) feature as far as the author
was concerned. It is perhaps noticeable either because the author feels
piqued that members of another group did not make the discovery or
because he feels the delay in reporting somehow hindered progress in
investigating properties of pulsars. Alternatively, the same utterance
could in principle be used as evidence for the admiration expressed by
this author for the Cambridge group's ability to keep things under
wraps for so long. The utterance may constitute admiration, again
because the time period is a noteworthy or unusual feature. In this
reading, however, the time period represents an achievement made
against considerable odds; the fact that it was achieved facilitated the
protection of a graduate student's first achievement and enhanced the
progress of science unhindered by outside interference from the media
or other observers.
From Order to Disorder                                                   35


   In principle, the number of alternative readings of this particular
utterance is very large. The number which will be accepted as
plausible by an informed audience, however, will be constrained by the
particular context which is brought to bear upon the reading of the
utterance. In the same way, researchers with any knowledge of the
particular research situation in question will (almost automatically)
find that one of the two alternatives outlined above is the more
plausible. It might, for example, be argued that the reading of the
utterance as a complaint is more consistent with other available
evidence than is it's reading as admiration. It could thus be said that
Hoyle's comments were made in the aftermath of the award of the
Nobel Prize for the pulsar discovery; that this resurrected Hoyle's
dormant bitterness about his previous dealings with the Cambridge
group; and that this is consistent with the interpretation of Hoyle
making a complaint. 4 Of necessity, however, arguments for the
consistency of one particular reading with other evidence depend, in
some complex way, on readings of other utterances made by proponents of the argument. If asked to justify these ''auxiliary" readings,
proponents would be forced either to invoke yet further readings or to
return to the original utterance for justification. In either case, requests
for justification can never, in principle, be exhausted. In practice, of
course, even persistent challengers yield their ground and a reading is
produced. In other words, a particular reading is made for practical
purposes at hand. The point here, however, is that in principle any
alternative can be questioned. The fact that many observers would
regard the reading of complaint as more plausible than that of
admiration is largely irrelevant. Alternative readings are always
possible and any one reading can always be undermined or faulted.
   By extending this argument to the observer's use of any observation,
rather than just an utterance, we can provide the following provisional
formulation of a major theme of our discussion. The observer has to
base his analysis on shifting ground. He is faced with the task of
producing an ordered version of observations and utterances when
each of his readings of observations and utterances can be counterbalanced with an alternative. In principle, then, the task of producing
an incorrigible version of the actions and behaviour of the subjects of
his study is hopeless. Nevertheless, we know that observers regularly
produce such ordered versions for consumption by others. His
production of order must therefore be done "for practical purposes,"
which means that he proceeds by evading or ignoring difficulties of
36                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


principle. 5 If this is the case, then it becomes important to understand
how observers routinely ignore the philosophical problem of the
constant availability of alternative descriptions and readings. In other
words, one reaction to the recognition of these fundamental problems
is to investigate the methods and procedures by which observers
produce ordered versions of the utterances and observations which
they have accumulated. The focus of investigation from this point of
view is the production of order.
   It is not difficult to realise that the work of scientists may well
involve similar problems of procedure. It became clear in the study of
pulsar research, for example, that participants were divided over the
correct interpretation of reports of the discovery made by one of the
principal investigators at Cambridge ( Woolgar, 1978). Some claimed
that these reports demonstrated inconsistency and lack of clarity,
which were evidence of willful concealment and secrecy; others denied
that there was any inconsistency. Of course, the occurrence of
practically achieved alternative readings is most obvious in situations
of controversy. It is surely the case, nonetheless, that the unhesitant
accomplishment of readings goes on throughout scientific activity.
The elimination of alternative interpretations of scientific data and the
rendering of these alternatives as less plausible is a central characteristic of scientific activity. Consequently, the practising scientist is likely
to be as much involved with the task of producing ordered and
plausible accounts out of a mass of disordered observations as is the
outside observer. By paying more attention to the way in which we, as
observers, produce the account you are now reading, we hope to gain
an insight into some of the techniques used by scientists in their
attempts to produce ordered accounts.
   In sum, then, our discussion is informed by the conviction that a
body of practices widely regarded by outsiders as well organised,
logical, and coherent, in fact consists of a disordered array of
observations with which scientists struggle to produce order. As we
have mentioned, the adoption of the belief that science is well ordered
has a corollary, that any study of its practice is relatively straightforward and that the content of science is beyond sociological study.
However, we argue that both scientists and observers are routinely
confronted by a seething mass of alternative interpretations. Despite
participants' well-ordered reconstructions and rationalisations, actual
scientific practice entails the confrontation and negotiation of utter
confusion. The solution adopted by scientists is the imposition of
From Order to Disorder                                                 37


various frameworks by which the extent of background noise can be
reduced and against which an apparently coherent signal can be
presented. The process whereby such frameworks are constructed and
imposed is the subject of our study.
   The above comments are intended to justify the emphasis in our
discussion on the ways in which scientists produce order. This
necessarily involves an examination of the methodical way in which
observations and experiences are organised so that sense can be made
of them. As already noted, we have every reason to believe that the
accomplishment of this kind of task is no mean feat, as is clear from a
consideration of the corresponding task faced by the observer when
confronted by his field notes. The observer's task is to transform notes
of the kind presented at the beginning of this chapter into an ordered
account. But exactly how and where should the observer begin this
transformation? It is clear that when seen through the eyes of a total
newcomer, the daily comings and goings of the laboratory take on an
alien quality. The observer initially encounters a mysterious and
apparently unconnected sequence of events. In order to make sense of
his observations, the observer normally adopts some kind of theme by
which he hopes to be able to construct a pattern. If he can successfully
use a theme to convince others of the existence of a pattern, he can be
said, at least according to relatively weak criteria, to have ''explained"
his observations. Of course, the selection and adoption of "themes" is
highly problematic. For example, the way in which the theme is
selected can be held to bear upon the validity of his explanation; the
observer's selection of a theme constitutes his method for which he is
accountable. It is not enough simply to fabricate order out of an
initially chaotic collection of observations; the observer needs to be
able to demonstrate that this fabrication has been done correctly, or, in
short, that his method is valid.
   One of the many possible schemes designed to meet criteria of
validity holds that descriptions of social phenomena should be
deductively derived from theoretical systems and subsequently tested
against empirical observations. In particular, it is important that
testing be carried out in isolation from the circumstances in which the
observations were gathered. On the other hand, it is argued that
adequate descriptions can only result from an observer's prolonged
acquaintance with behavioural phenomena. Descriptions are adequate, according to this perspective, in the sense that they emerge
during the course of techniques such as participant observation. The
38                                                     LABORATORY LIFE


descriptions thus produced, it is argued, are more likely to find some
measure of congruence with the set of categories and concepts of
participants under study. This latter version of adequate sociological
method enjoys a number of variations, ranging from Glaser and
Strauss' (1968) notion of "grounded theory" to the dictum of
"phenomenologically oriented" sociology that investigators should
"be true to the data" (see, for example, Tudor, 1976). The scheme
which favours the deductive production of independently testable
descriptions is oriented towards what has been called etic validation
(Harris, 1968), that is, the audience who will ultimately assess the
validity of a description is a community of fellow observers. The main
advantage of this scheme is the comparative ease with which the
reliability and replicability of descriptions can be assessed. By
contrast, the scheme which favours the "emergence" of phenomenologically informed descriptions of social behaviour is most appropriately amenable to emic validation, that is, the ultimate decision about
the adequacy of description rests with participants themselves. This
has the advantage that descriptions produced by an observer are less
likely to be mere impositions of categories and concepts which are
alien to participants. At the same time, however, descriptions based on
the categorical systems of participants in particular situations can
provide problems for their generalisation to other situations. Furthermore, the observer remains accountable to a community of fellow
observers in the sense that they provide a check that he has correctly
followed procedures for emic validation.
   This simplistic distinction between methods for making sense of
observations scarcely does justice to the range of methodological
positions and debates current within sociology. Nevertheless, it helps
clarify the diversity of approaches which can be adopted in the study of
science. Very crudely, if Mertonian analyses depend on etic validation, in that they pay relatively little attention to participants' technical
culture, the approach exemplified by Edge and M u l k a y more closely
relies on emic validation, at least in the sense that participants would
agree that these authors have correctly utilised their t e c h n i c a l concepts and terminology. In general, observers reliant on emic validation
will necessarily be concerned with whether or not they are correctly
using the concepts employed by the subjects of their study. But
overzealous concern with the correct usage of these concepts entails
the danger of "going native": in the extreme case, an analysis of a tribe
couched entirely in the concepts and language of the tribe would be
From Order to Disorder                                                                    39


both incomprehensible and u n h e l p f u l to all nonmembers of the tribe.
Moreover, the dangers of going native are p a r t i c u l a r l y marked in the
study of science, both because, as analysts, we are inevitably caught
up in social "science" traditions originating with explicit attempts to
mimic the natural sciences and because of the currently widespread
acceptance of the methods and achievements of science in the c u l t u r e
of which we are part. We also recognise the importance of t a k i n g
seriously the concepts used by members of the laboratory. But as one
way of resisting the temptation to go native, we shall attempt to explain
participants' use of these concepts as a social phenomenon. In line
with the principle of emic validation, then, our interest in the details of
scientific activity, in the ways in which scientists produce order from
disorder, leads us to an approach which relies on the emergence, from
the circumstances of our study, of themes for discerning patterns in our
observations. We attempt to capitalise on the experiences of observation of a laboratory in situ: by being close to localised scientific
practices the observer has a preferential situation from which to
understand how scientists themselves produce order. At the same
time, we recognise that it is inappropriate merely to take for granted the
concepts with which scientists work.


Materials and Methods
     The materials on which the discussion in this book is based were
obtained d u r i n g field research carried out by the first author between
October 1975 and August 1977. The choice of laboratory was
determined m a i n l y by the generosity of one of the senior members of
the i n s t i t u t e in providing office space, free access to most discussions
and to a l l the archives, papers and other documents of the laboratory,
and part-time employment as a technician in the laboratory. The
twenty-one-month programme of participant observation yielded a
large body of data, only a small fraction of which is used in the present
discussion. In addition to the field notes (referred to throughout our
discussion by the page and v o l u m e n u m b e r of the field d i a r y ) , an
i n t e n s i v e a n a l y s i s was made of a l l the l i t e r a t u r e produced by members
of the laboratory. At the same time, a wide range of documents
r e l e v a n t to the d a i l y a c t i v i t i e s of the laboratory was amassed: drafts of
articles in preparation, letters between participants, memoranda, and
various data sheets p r o v i d e d by participants. Formal i n t e r v i e w s were
also carried out w i t h all members of the laboratory as well as with
40                                                     LABORATORY LIFE


certain other scientists in the field working at other laboratories. These
interviews supplemented the vast body of comments and information
gleaned during informal discussions. The reflections of the observer,
particularly on his work as a technician in the laboratory, provided a
further source of data.
   Preliminary analysis and writing began soon after i n i t i a l participation. Partly because of the availability of office space within the
laboratory, it was possible to carry on the work of writing without
losing opportunities of t a k i n g part in discussions between participants
or of observing other aspects of daily life in the laboratory.
   No attempt was made to conceal the observational role. For
example, it was made clear to participants that notes were being taken
on all that went on in the laboratory. The observer discussed his
preliminary drafts with participants and organised several seminar
discussions in which visiting sociologists and philosophers of science
interacted with members of the laboratory. 6
   In all but Chapter 3, which is historical in character (see below),
names, dates, and places have been changed or replaced by i n i t i a l s so
as to protect the anonymity of those involved. We also decided only to
use those anecdotes and events that, in our judgment, were u n l i k e l y to
cause social or political repercussions.


The Organisation of the Argument
   It will be clear from the argument of this chapter that our very
specific interest in laboratory life concerns the way in which the daily
activities of working scientists lead to the construction of facts.
Obviously, this particular interest differs substantially from existing
perspectives on laboratories. Consequently, we shall not dwell on
aspects such as the administrative organisation of laboratory work
(Swatez, 1970), the influence of such organisation on creativity, the
influence of laboratory organisation on scientists' careers (Lemaine
and Matalon, 1969), nor on the nature of communication and patterns
of information flow (Bitz et al., 1975). 7 Rather our interests focus on
two major questions: How are the facts constructed in a laboratory,
and how can a sociologist account for this construction? What, if any,
are the differences between the construction of facts and the construction of accounts?
   In Chapter 2, we portray the laboratory as seen through the eyes of a
total newcomer. The notion of anthropological strangeness is used to
From Order to Disorder                                               41

depict the activities of the laboratory as those of a remote culture and
to thus explore the way in which an ordered account of the laboratory
life can be generated without recourse to the explanatory concepts of
the inhabitants themselves. In order to emphasise the fictional nature
of the account-generating process, we place the burden of this
anthropological investigation on the shoulders of a fictional character:
the visit to the laboratory is made by "the observer.'' Of course, the
activities and interests of the laboratory can also be explained along a
historical dimension. In particular, laboratory activity can be seen to
hinge on what have been previously been constructed and accepted as
facts. Against the backcloth of laboratory activity provided by our
anthropological observer, therefore. Chapter 3 undertakes a close
examination of the historical construction of one particular fact and of
the implications for subsequent laboratory work. In Chapter 4, we
move from an historical exposition of the construction of a fact to a
consideration of the microprocesses of negotiation which take place
continually in the laboratory. The construction of facts depends
critically on these microprocesses, and yet the retrospective characterisation of scientific activity frequently replaces them with epistemological descriptions of "thought processes" and "logical reasoning." We therefore look closely at the relationship between these
alternative portrayals of scientific activity and at the way in which one
form of account becomes replaced by another. In Chapter 5, we turn
our attention to the producers of facts. In particular, we look at the
series of strategies taken up by members of the laboratory in their
decisions to back the construction of one or other fact and in their
efforts to enhance their ability further to invest in the construction of
"new" facts.
   By the end of Chapter 5, we are in a position to reconsider the
laboratory as a system of fact construction. On the basis of the
preceding discussion we then recap, in Chapter 6, the essential
elements of the process whereby an ordered account is fabricated from
disorder and chaos. Finally, we discuss the essential s i m i l a r i t y
between the construction of accounts which characterises the work of
the laboratory and our own construction of an account which portrays
the laboratory in this way.
42                                                              LABORATORY LIFE


                                    NOTES
    1 We make no attempt here systematically to relate our methodological procedures to those used in anthropological studies For preliminary discussions on the
relevance of anthropology for the study of science, see Horton ( 1967) and the readings
in Wilson ( 1 9 7 0 ) More recent discussions include Shapin (forthcoming) and Bloor
(1978).
    2. Medawar( 1964) formulates his argument in terms of the "processes of thought"
which arc misrepresented through scientific reports While agreeing with the general
point that these reports are a source of considerable obfuscation. we have severe
reservations about any quest for the "thought processes" which "underly" the
construction of these reports. As we argue in detail in Chapter 4. explanations of
scientific activity in terms of thought processes are themselves considerably misleading
    3. The point has been made by a number of authors. See. for example, the
discussions in Lakatos and Musgrave ( 1970) and Bloor ( 1974: 1976).
    4 This argument is developed at length in Woolgar ( 1978)
    5 This theme is taken up again in Chapter 6 with reference to the game of "Go " At
the beginning of the game, any move appears as possible, or as good, as any other.
    6 The rationale for this strategy and its effects on the relationship between observer
and participants w i l l be discussed in detail elsewhere
    7. A n u m b e r of French authors have recently discussed laboratory science. See. for
example Lemaine et al ( 1977) Callon ( 1 9 7 8 ) For a remarkable history of the biology
laboratory in the eighteenth century, sec Salomon-Bayet ( 1 9 7 8 )
Chapter 2




AN ANTHROPOLOGIST VISITS THE LABORATORY




When an anthropological observer enters the field, one of his most
fundamental preconceptions is that he might eventually be able to
make sense of the observations and notes which he records. This, after
all, is one of the basic principles of scientific enquiry. No matter how
confused or absurd the circumstances and activities of his tribe might
appear, the ideal observer retains his faith that some kind of a
systematic, ordered account is attainable. For a total newcomer to the
laboratory, we can imagine that his first encounter with his subjects
would severely jeopardise such faith. The ultimate objective of
systematically ordering and reporting observations must seem particularly illusory in the face of the barrage of questions which first
occur to him. What are these people doing? What are they talking
about? What is the purpose of these partitions or these walls? Why is
this room in semidarkness whereas this bench is brightly lit? Why is
everybody whispering? What part is played by the animals who squeak
incessantly in ante-rooms?
   But for our partial f a m i l i a r i t y w i t h some aspects of scientific activity
and our ability to draw upon a body of common sense assumptions, a
flood of nonsensical impressions would follow the formulation of these

                                                                                    43
44                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


questions. Perhaps these animals are being processed for eating.
Maybe we are witnessing oracular prophecy through the inspection of
rats entrails. Perhaps the individuals spending hours discussing
scribbled notes and figures are lawyers. Are the heated debates in front
of the blackboard part of some gambling contest? Perhaps the
occupants of the laboratory are hunters of some kind, who, after
patiently lying in wait by a spectograph for several hours, suddenly
freeze like a gun dog fixed on a scent.
   Such speculations and the questions which give rise to them appear
nonsensical precisely because we as observers do presuppose some
knowledge of what the laboratory could be doing. For example, it is
possible to imagine the purpose of walls and partitions without ever
having set foot in a laboratory. We attempt to make sense not by
bracketing our familiarity with the setting but by using features which
we perceive as common both to the setting and to our knowledge or
previous experience. Indeed, it would be difficult to provide any
sensible account of the laboratory without recourse to our taken-forgranted f a m i l i a r i t y with some aspects of science.
   Clearly, then, the observer's organisation of questions, observations, and notes is inevitably constrained by cultural affinities. Only a
limited set of questions is relevant and hence sensible. In this sense, the
notion of a total newcomer is unrealisable in practice. At another
extreme, an observer's total reliance on scientists' versions of laboratory life would be unsatisfactory. A description of science cast entirely
in terms used by scientists would be incomprehensible to outsiders.
The adoption of scientific versions of science would teach us little that
is new about science in the making; the observer would simply reiterate
those accounts provided by scientists when they conduct guided tours
of their laboratory for visitors.
   In practice, observers steer a middle path between the two extreme
roles of total newcomer (an unattainable ideal) and that of complete
participant (who in going native is unable usefully to communicate to
his community of fellow observers). This is not to deny, of course, that
at different stages throughout his research he is severely tempted
towards either extreme. His problem is to select a principle of
organisation which will enable him to provide an account of the
laboratory sufficiently distinct from those given by scientists themselves and yet of sufficient interest to both scientists and readers not
familiar with biology. In short, the observer's principle of organisation
should provide an Ariadne's thread in a labyrinth of seeming chaos and confusion.
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                 45


  In this chapter, we follow the trials and tribulations of a fictional
character, "the observer," 1 in his attempts to use the notion of literary
inscription 2 as a principle for organizing his initial observations of the
laboratory.


Literary Inscription
   Although our observer shares the same broad cultural knowlege as
scientists, he has never seen a laboratory before and has no knowledge
of the particular field within which laboratory members are working.
He is enough of an insider to understand the general purpose of walls,
chairs, coats, and so on, but not enough to know what terms like TRF,
Hemoglobin, and "buffer" mean. Even without knowledge of these
terms, however, he can not fail to note the striking distinction between
two areas of the laboratory. One area of the laboratory (section B on
Figure 2.1) contains various items of apparatus, while the other
(section A) contains only books, dictionaries, and papers. Whereas in
section B individuals work with apparatus in a variety of ways: they
can be seen to be cutting, sewing, mixing, shaking, screwing, marking,
and so on; individuals in section A work with written materials: either
reading, writing, or typing. Furthermore, although occupants of
section A, who do not wear white coats, spend long periods of time with
their white-coated colleagues in section B, the reverse is seldom the
case. Individuals referred to as doctors read and write in offices in
section A while other staff, known as technicians, spend most of their
time handling equipment in section B.
   Each of sections A and B can be further subdivided. Section B
appears to comprise two quite separate wings: in the wing referred to
by participants as the "physiology side" there are both animals and
apparatus: in the "chemistry side" there are no animals. The people
from one wing rarely go into the other. Section A can also be
subdivided. On the one hand, there are people who write and engage in
telephone conversations; on the other hand, there are those who type
and dial telephone calls. This division, like the others, is marked by
partitions. In one area (the library) eight offices surround the perimeter
of a conference room with table, chairs, and a screen. In the other area
("the secretariat") there are typewriters and people controlling the
flow of telephone calls and mail.
   What is the relationship between section A ("my office," "the
office," "the library") and section B ("the bench")? Consulting the
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                     47


map he has drawn, our observer tries to imagine another institution or
setting with a similar division. It is hard to call to mind any factory or
administrative organisation which has a similar set up. If, for example,
it was a factory, we might expect the office space (section A) to be
much smaller. If it was some kind of administrative agency, the bench
space (section B) would be entirely superfluous. Although the relation
between the two wings of the office space is common to many
productive units, the special relation between office space and bench
space is sufficient to distinguish the laboratory from other productive
units. This is apparent on two counts. Firstly, at the end of each day,
technicians bring piles of documents from the bench space through to
the office space. In a factory we might expect these to be reports of
what has been processed and manufactured. For members of this
laboratory, however, these documents constitute what is yet to be
processed and manufactured. Secondly, secretaries post off papers
from the laboratory at an average rate of one every ten days. However,
far from being reports of what has been produced in the factory,
members take these papers to be the product of their unusual factory.
Surely, then, if this unit merely processes paper work, it must be some
sort of administrative agency? Not so: even a cursory look at the
papers shows that the figures and diagrams which they contain are the
very same documents produced in section B a few days or weeks
previously.
   It occurs to our observer that he might be able to make sense of
laboratory activity according to one very simple principle. For him,
the scene shown in Photograph 13,3 represents the prototype of
scientific work in the laboratory: a desk belonging to one of the
inhabitants of the office space (referred to as the doctors) is covered
with paperwork. On the left is an opened issue of Science. To the right
is a diagram which represents a tidied or summarised version of data
sheets lying further to the right. It is as if two types of literature are
being juxtaposed: one type is printed and published outside the
laboratory; the other type comprises documents produced within the
laboratory, such as hastily drawn diagrams and files containing pages
of figures. Beneath the documents at the centre of the desk lies a draft.
Just like the drafts of a novel or a report, this draft is scribbled, its pages
heavy with corrections, question marks, and alterations. Unlike most
novels however, the text of the draft is peppered with references, either
to other papers, or to diagrams, tables or documents ("as shown in
figure . . . ," ''in table . . . we can see that . . . "). Closer inspection of
48                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


the material lying on the desk (Photograph 13) reveals, for example,
that the opened issue of Science is cited in the draft. Part of the
argument contained in a Science article is said in the draft to be
unrepeatable by virtue of what is contained in documents lying to the
right of the desk. These documents are also cited in the draft. The desk
thus appears to be the hub of our productive unit. For it is here that new
drafts are constructed by the juxtaposition of two sources of literature,
one originating outside and the other being generated within the
laboratory.
   It is no surprise to our observer to learn that scientists read
published material. What surprises him more is that a vast body of
literature emanates from within the laboratory. How is it that the
costly apparatus, animals, chemicals, and activities of the bench space
combine to produce a written document, and why are these documents
so highly valued by participants?
   After several further excursions into the bench space, it strikes our
observer that its members are compulsive and almost manic writers.
Every bench has a large leatherbound book in which members
meticulously record what they have just done against a certain code
number. This appears strange because our observer has only witnessed such diffidence in memory in the work of a few particularly
scrupulous novelists. It seems that whenever technicians are not
actually handling complicated pieces of apparatus, they are filling in
blank sheets with long lists of figures; when they are not writing on
pieces of paper, they spend considerable time writing numbers on the
sides of hundreds of tubes, or pencilling large numbers on the fur of
rats. Sometimes they use coloured papertape to mark beakers or to
index different rows on the glossy surface of a surgical table. The result
of this strange mania for inscription is the proliferation of files,
documents, and dictionaries. Thus, in addition to the Oxford dictionary and the dictionary of known peptides, we can also find what might
be called material dictionaries. For example, Photograph 2 shows a
refrigerator which houses racks of samples, each of which bears a label
with a ten-figure code number. Similarly, in another part of the
laboratory, a vast supply of chemicals has been arranged in alphabetical order on shelves from which technicians can select and make use
of appropriate substances. A more obvious example of these material
dictionaries is the collection of preprints ( Photograph 14, background)
and thousands of files full of data sheets, each of which also has its own
code number. Quite apart from these labelled and indexed collections
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                49


is the kind of paperwork (such as invoices, pay cheques, inventory
schedules, mail files, and so on) which can be found in most modern
productive units.
   When the observer moves from the bench space to the office space,
he is greeted with yet more writing. Xeroxed copies of articles, with
words underlined and exclamation marks in the margins, are everywhere. Drafts of articles in preparation intermingle with diagrams
scribbled on scrap paper, letters from colleagues and reams of paper
spewed out by the computer in the next room; pages cut from articles
are glued to other pages; excerpts from draft paragraphs change hands
between colleagues while more advanced drafts pass from office to
office being altered constantly, retyped, recorrected, and eventually
crushed into the format of this or that journal. When not writing, the
occupants of section A scribble on blackboards (Photograph 10) or
dictate letters, or prepare slides for their next talk.
   Our anthropological observer is thus confronted with a strange tribe
who spend the greatest part of their day coding, marking, altering,
correcting, reading, and writing. What then is the significance of those
activities which are apparently not related to the marking, writing,
coding, and correcting? Photograph 4, for example, shows two young
women handling some rats. Despite the protocol sheet to the right, the
numbered tubes on the rack and the clock in the foreground which
controls the rhythmn of the assay, the women themselves are neither
writing nor reading. The woman on the left is injecting a liquid with a
syringe and withdrawing another liquid with another syringe which she
then passes on to the other woman; the second woman then empties the
syringe into a tube. It is only then that writing takes over: the time and
tube number is carefully recorded. In the meantime animals have been
killed and various materials, such as ether, cotton, pipettes, syringes,
and tubes have been used. What then is the point of killing these
animals? How does the consumption of materials relate to the writing
activity? Even the careful monitoring of the contents of the rack
(Photograph 5 ) makes the situation no clearer to our observer. Over a
period of several days, tubes are arranged in rows, other liquids are
added, the mixtures are shaken and eventually removed for refrigeration.
   Periodically, the routine of manipulation and rearrangement of
tubes is interrupted. The samples extracted from rats are put into one
of the pieces of apparatus and undergo a radical transformation: instead of modifying or labelling the samples, the machine produces a
sheet of figures (Photograph 6). One of the participants tears the
50                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


sheet from the machine's counter and, after scrutinising it carefully,
arranges for the disposal of the tubes. In other words, the same tubes
which had been carefully handled for a week, which had cost time and
effort to the tune of several hundred dollars, were now regarded as
worthless. The focus of attention shifted to a sheet of figures.
Fortunately, our observer was quite used to finding such absurd and
erratic behaviour in the subjects of his studies. Relatively unperturbed,
therefore, he braced himself for his next surprise.
   It was not long in coming. The sheet of figures, taken to be the end
result of a long assay, was used as the input to a computer (Photograph
 11). After a short time, the computer printed out a data sheet and it was
this, rather than the original sheet of figures, which was regarded as the
important product of the operation. The sheet of figures was merely
filed alongside thousands like it in the library. Nor was the series of
transformations yet complete. Photograph 12 shows a technician at
work on several data sheets produced by the computer. Soon after this
photograph was taken, she was called into one of the offices to show the
product of her labours: a single elegant curve carefully drawn on graph
paper. Once again, the focus of attention shifted: the computer data
sheets were filed away and it was the peaks and slopes of the curve
which excited comment from participants in their offices: "how
striking," "a well differentiated peak," "it goes down quite fast," "this
spot is not very different from this one." A few days later, the observer
could see a neatly redrawn version of the same curve in a paper sent out
for possible publication. If accepted, this same figure would be seen by
others when they read the article and it was more than likely that the
same figure would eventually sit on some other desk as part of a
renewed process of literary juxtaposition and construction.
   The whole series of transformations, between the rats from which
samples are initially extracted and the curve which finally apears in
publication, involves an enormous quantity of sophisticated apparatus
(Photograph 8). By contrast with the expense and bulk of this
apparatus, the end product is no more than a curve, a diagram, or a
table of figures written on a frail sheet of paper. It is this document,
however, which is scrutinised by participants for its "significance"
and which is used as "evidence" in part of an argument or in an article.
Thus, the main upshot of the prolonged series of transformations is a
document which, as will become clear, is a crucial resource in the
construction of a "substance." In some situations, this process is very
much shorter. In the chemistry wing in particular, the use of certain
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                     51


pieces of apparatus makes it easy to get the impression that substances
directly provide their own "signatures" (Photograph 9). While participants in the office space struggle with the writing of new drafts, the
laboratory around them is itself a hive of writing activity. Sections of
muscle, light beams, even shreds of blotting paper activate various
recording equipment. And the scientists themselves base their own
writing on the written output of the recording equipment.
   It is clear, then, that particular significance can be attached to the
operation of apparatus which provides some kind of written output. Of
course, there are various items of apparatus in the laboratory which do
not have this function. Such "machines" transform matter between
one state and another. Photograph 3, for example, shows a rotary
evaporator, a centrifuge, a shaker, and a grinder. By contrast, a
number of other items of apparatus, which we shall call "inscription
devices," 4 transform pieces of matter into written documents. More
exactly, an inscription device is any item of apparatus or particular
configuration of such items which can transform a material substance
into a figure or diagram which is directly usable by one of the members
of the office space. As we shall see later, the particular arrangement of
apparatus can have a vital significance for the production of a useful
inscription. Furthermore, some of the components of such a configuration are of little consequence by themselves. For example, the
counter shown in Photograph 6 is not itself an inscription device since
its output is not directly usable in an argument. It does, however, form
part of an inscription device known as a bioassay. 5
   An important consequence of this notion of inscription device is that
inscriptions are regarded as having a direct relationship to "the
original substance." The final diagram or curve thus provides the focus
of discussion about properties of the substance. The intervening
material activity and all aspects of what is often a prolonged and costly
process are bracketed off in discussions about what the figure means.
The process of writing articles about the substance thus takes the end
diagram as a starting point. Within the office space, participants
produce articles by comparing and contrasting such diagrams with
other similar diagrams and with other articles in the published
literature (see pp. 69-86).
   At this point, the observer felt that the laboratory was by no means
quite as confusing as he had first thought. It seemed that there might be
an essential s i m i l a r i t y between the inscription capabilities of apparatus, the manic passion for marking, coding, and f i l i n g , and the literary
52                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


skills of writing, persuasion, and discussion. Thus, the observer could
even make sense of such obscure activities as a technician grinding the
brains of rats, by realising that the eventual end product of such
activity might be a highly valued diagram. Even the most complicated
jumble of figures might eventually end up as part of some argument
between "doctors." For the observer, then, the laboratory began to
take on the appearance of a system of literary inscription.
    From this perspective, many hitherto strange occurrences fell into
place. Many other types of activity, although superficially unrelated to
the literary theme, could be seen as means of obtaining inscriptions.
For example, the energy inputs (Photograph 1) represented intermediary resources to be consumed in the process of ensuring that
inscription devices functioned properly. By also taking into account
the supply of animals and chemicals, it was clear that a cycle of
production which ended in a small folder of figures might have cost
several thousand dollars. Similarly, the technicians and doctors who
comprised the work force represented one further kind of input
necessary for the efficient operation of the inscription devices and for
the production and dispatch of articles.
    The central prominence of documents in our discussion so far
contrasts markedly with a tendency evident in some sociology of
science to stress the importance of informal communication in
 scientific activity. For example, it has been frequently noted that the
communication of scientific information occurs predominantly through
informal rather than formal channels (Garvey and Griffith, 1967;
 1971). This is particularly likely where there exists a well-developed
network of contacts as, for example, in an invisible college (Price,
 1963; Crane, 1969; 1972). Proponents of this argument have often
played down the role of formal communication channels in information transfer, choosing instead to explain their continued existence in
terms of an arena for the establishment of priority and subsequent
conferrai of credit (Hagstrom, 1965). Observations of the present
laboratory, however, indicate that some care needs to be exercised in
 interpreting the relative importance of different communication channels. We take formal communication to refer to highly structured and
 stylised reports epitomised by the published journal article. Almost
without exception, every discussion and brief exchange observed in
the laboratory centred around one or more items in the published
 literature (Latour, 1976). In other words, informal exchanges invariably
focussed on the substance of formal communication. Later we shall
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                 53

suggest that much informal communication in fact establishes its
legitimacy by referring or pointing to published literature.
   Every presentation and discussion of results entailed the manipulation either of slides, protocol sheets, papers, preprints, labels, or
articles. Even the most informal exchanges constantly focussed either
directly or indirectly on documents. Participants also indicated that
their telephone conversations nearly always focussed on the discussion of documents; either on a possible collaboration in the writing of a
paper, or on a paper which had been sent but which contained some
ambiguity, or on some technique presented at a recent meeting. When
there was no direct reference to a paper, the purpose of the call was
often to announce or push a result due to be included in a paper
currently being prepared. Even when they were not discussing a draft,
individuals devoted considerable energy to devising ways of attaining
some readable trace. In these kinds of discussions, scientists anticipated that possible objections to their argument might appear in some
forthcoming paper. More important for the present, however, is the
omnipresence of literature in the sense that we have defined it, that is,
in terms of written documents, only a few of which appear in published
form.


The Culture of the Laboratory
   To those familiar with the work of the laboratory, the above account
w i l l have little to say that is new. For an anthropologist, however, the
notion of literary inscription is still problematic. As we said earlier,
our observer has an intermediary status: while the broad cultural
values which he shares with the scientists facilitate some familiarity
with the commonplace objects and events in the laboratory, he is
u n w i l l i n g solely to rely on scientists' own versions of the way the
laboratory operates. One consequence of his intermediary status is
that his account so far has failed to satisfy any one audience. It could
be said, for example, that in portraying scientists as readers and writers
he has said nothing of the substance of their reading and writing.
Indeed, our observer incurred the considerable anger of members of
the laboratory, who resented their representation as participants in
some literary activity. In the first place, this failed to distinguish them
from any other writers. Secondly, they felt that the important point was
that they were writing about something, and that this something was
"neuroendocrinology." Our observer experienced the depressing
sensation that his Ariane's thread had led him up a blind alley.
54                                                   LABORATORY LIFE

            ARTICLES ABOUT NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY

   We noted earlier that participants made sense of their juxtaposition
of literatures by reference to a world of literature published outside the
laboratory. To the extent that such literature represents the scriptures
(Knorr, 1978) from which participants take the sense of their
activities, we can only begin to understand what the literature is about
by close inspection of the mythology which informs their activities.
Our use of the term mythology is not intended pejoratively. Rather, it
refers to a broad frame of reference within which can be situated the
activities and practices of a particular culture (Barthes, 1957).
   Our observer noticed that when asked by a total stranger, members
of the laboratory replied that they worked (or were) "in neuroendocrinology." They went on to explain that neuroendocrinology was the
result of a hybridisation which had taken place in the 1940s between
neurology, described as the science of the nervous system, and
endocrinology, the science of the hormonal system. It occurred to our
observer that such location "in a field" facilitated the correspondence
between a particular group, network, or laboratory and a complex
mixture of beliefs, habits, systematised knowledge, exemplary achievements, experimental practices, oral traditions, and craft skills. Although
referred to as the "culture" in anthropology, this latter set of attributes
is commonly subsumed under the term paradigm when applied to
people calling themselves scientists. 6 Neuroendocrinology seemed to
have all the attributes of a mythology: it had had its precursors, its
mythical founders, and its revolutions (Meites et al., 1975). In its
simplest version, the mythology goes as follows: After World War II it
was realised that nerve cells could also secrete hormones and that
there is no nerve connection between brain and pituitary to bridge the
gap between the central nervous system and the hormonal system. A
competing perspective, designated the "hormonal feedback model"
was roundly defeated after a long struggle by participants who are now
regarded as veterans (Scharrer and Scharrer, 1963). As in many
mythological versions of the scientific past, the struggle is now
formulated in terms of a fight between abstract entities such as models
and ideas. Consequently, present research appears based on one
particular conceptual event, the explanation of which only merits
scant elaboration by scientists. The following is a typical account: "In
the 1950s there was a sudden crystallization of ideas, whereby a
number of scattered and apparently unconnected results suddenly
made sense and were intensely gathered and reviewed."
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                    55


   The mythology through which a culture represents itself is not
necessarily entirely false. A count of publications, for example, shows
that the growth of papers dealing with neuroendocrinology after 1950
was exponential, and that neuroendocrinology, which made up only 3
percent of endocrinology as a whole in 1968, grew to 6 percent by
1975. In broad outline, then, the growth of neuroendocrinology
appears to have followed the pattern of what some sociologists of
science have termed "scientific development" (for example, Crane,
1972; M u l k a y et al., 1975). However, the mythology of its development is very rarely mentioned in the course of the day-to-day activities
of members of the laboratory. The beliefs that are central to the
mythology are noncontroversial and taken for granted, and only enjoy
discussion during the brief guided tours of the laboratory provided for
visiting laymen. In the setting, it is difficult to determine whether the
mythology is never alluded to simply because it is a remote and
unimportant remnant of the past or because it is now a well-known and
generally accepted item of folklore.
    After his first few days in the setting, our observer was no longer told
about neuroendocrinology. Instead, daily concerns focussed on a
different set of specific cultural values which, although from time to
time talked about as being in neuroendocrinology, appeared to
constitute a distinct culture (or "paradigm"). Our criteria for identifying this specific culture is not simply that a specialty represents a
subset of a larger discipline. This would be no more accurate than
 considering the Bouarées' nations as a subset of the larger Boukara
ethnical group. Instead, we use culture to refer to the set of arguments
 and beliefs to which there is a constant appeal in daily life and which is
the object of all passions, fears, and respect. Participants in our
 laboratory said that they were dealing with "substances called
releasing factors" (for popular accounts, see Guillemin and Burgus,
 1972; Serially et al., 1973; Vale, 1976). When they presented their
 work to scientifically informed outsiders, they formulated their efforts
 as attempting "to isolate, characterize, synthesise and understand the
 modes of action of releasing factors." This is the brief that distinguishes
them from their other colleagues in neuroendocrinology. It is also their
cultural trait, their particularity, and their horizon of work and
 achievement. The general mythology provides them with the tenet that
the brain controls the endocrine system, and they share this with a
 large c u l t u r a l group of neuroendocrinologists. Specific to their own
c u l t u r e , however, is an additional postulate that "control by the brain
56                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


is mediated by discrete chemical substances, so called releasing
factors, which are of a peptidic nature" (Meites, 1970). 7 Their skills,
working habits, and the apparatus at their disposal are all organised
around one specific material (the hypothalamus), which is deemed
especially important for the study of releasing factors.
   Our observer can now picture his informants as readers and writers
of Neuroendocrinological literature who acknowledge certain texts
published in the previous five years as major achievements. These
tests record the structure of several releasing factors in sentences
comprising words or phonemes which relate to substances called
amino acids. In general, the structure of any substance of a peptidic
nature can be expressed in the form of a string of amino acids (for
example, Tyr-Lys-Phe-Pro). 8 The texts that specify the structure of
the first releasing factors were considered major breakthroughs by all
informants (see Chapter 3). "In 1969 we discovered the structure of
the thyrotropin releasing factor"; in 1971 they discovered or confirmed the structure of another releasing factor known as LRF; in 1972
they discovered the structure of a third substance called somatostatin
(for general accounts, see Wade, 1978; Donovan et al., forthcoming).
   The importance of articles specifying the structure of releasing
factors is shown by the number of other articles which resulted. Papers
written by other informants constituted the outside literature used in
conjunction with internally produced inscriptions to generate new
papers. Figure 2.2 shows the relative boom in the number of papers
dealing with various substances after the initial specification of
structure in so-called breakthrough papers. As a result of these
publication explosions, the proportion of releasing factor publications
in neuroendocrinology rose from 17 percent in 1968 to 38 percent in
1975. This suggests that the releasing factor "specialty" was responsible for the general increase in the importance of neuroendocrinology
as a whole. Because of burgeoning outside interests, the laboratory's
share of publication in the specialty actually decreased as a result of its
success, from 42 percent in 1968 to 7 percent in 1975. 9 To put this in
perspective, however, it is worth noting that in 1975 publications in
releasing factors represented 39 percent of all publications in neuroendocrinology; neuroendocrinology represented only 6 percent of
endocrinology as a whole, and endocrinology is only one of many
disciplines within biology. Put another way, publications by members
of the laboratory in 1975 represented only 0.045 percent of those in
endocrinology. Clearly, some caution should be exercised in general-
58                                                       LABORATORY LIFE


ising the characteristics of scientific activity on the basis of this one
laboratory.
   So far we have said that each inscription device comprises a
particular combination of machines, pieces of apparatus, and technicians. Articles are written on the basis of specific flow of outside
literature, and with the use (either implicit or explicit) of part of the
archives in the laboratory. These archives comprise a wide range of
"material dictionaries," brain extracts, for example, as well as
protocol books. Our observer should now be able to discern several
distinct lines of activity in the laboratory, each of which corresponds to
a specific type of article which is f i n a l l y produced. For each type he
should be able to identify the i n d i v i d u a l s concerned, their location in
the laboratory, the technicians who assist, the inscription devices
employed, and the type of outside literature to w h i c h their work
relates. Three main lines of article production, referred to by participants as "programmes," could be clearly differentiated at the time
of the study. As can be seen from Table 2.1, they do not contribute
equally to the overall output of the laboratory, nor do they have the
same cost and subsequent impact. By examining the three programmes
in some detail, our observer hoped to be able to specify which
characteristics of activity were peculiar to this laboratory.
   The     first type of article written in this laboratory concerned new
natural substances in the hypothalamus (see Chapter 3). A substance
is obtained by superimposing two sets of inscriptions, one from a
recording device known as an assay in the physiology side of the
laboratory and the other from "purification cycles" carried out in the
chemistry side. Since the assay and purification cycle are inscription
devices common to all three programmes, we shall describe them in
some detail.
   Despite the many different types of activity referred to as assays (for
example, the bioassay, the in vitro and in vivo assays, direct or indirect
assays, radioimmunological or biological assays) they are all based on
the same principle (Rodgers, 1974). A recording mechanism (such as
a myograph, a gamma counter, or a simple rating sheet) is connected
up to an organism (either a cell, a muscle, or a whole animal) so as to
produce an easily readable trace. A substance with a known effect on
the organism is then administered to the organism as a control. The
effect on the organism is inscribed and its recorded trace is taken as a
baseline. An u n k n o w n substance is then administered and its effect
recorded. The result is a recorded difference between two traces, a
difference about which simple perceptive judgments ("it is the same,"
"it goes up," "there is a peak") can be made. If there is a difference, it
is taken as the sign of an "activity" in the unknown substance. Since
the central objective of the culture is to define any activity in terms of a
discrete chemical entity, the unknown substance is taken to the other
side of the laboratory for tests in the second main type of inscription
device, the purification cycle.
   The goal of the purification cycle is to isolate the entity which is
believed to have caused the recorded difference between two traces.
Samples of brain extract are subjected to a series of discriminations
(Anonymous, 1974). This entails the use of some stationary material
(such as a gel or a piece of blotting paper) as a selective sift which
60                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


delays the gradual movement of a sample of brain extract. (This
 movement can be variously due to gravity, electric forces, or cellular
 binding-Heftmann, 1967.) As a result of this process, samples are
transformed into a large number of fractions, each of which can be
scrutinised for physical properties of interest. The results are recorded
in the form of several peaks on graph paper. Each of these peaks
represents a discriminated fraction, one of which may correspond to
the discrete chemical entity which caused an activity in the assay. In
order to discover whether the entity is present, the fractions are taken
back to the physiology section of the laboratory and again take part in
an assay. By superimposing the result of this last assay with the result
of the previous purification, it is possible to see an overlap between one
peak and another. If the overlap can be repeated, the chemical fraction
is referred to as a "substance" and is given a name.
   Ideally, this shuttle between the assay (Photograph 4) and the
purification cycle (Photograph 7) ends with the identification of an
"isolated" substance. This is almost never the case, however, because
most of the differences between activities in the assay disappear when
the assay is repeated. The postulated substance CRF, for example, has
been shuttling to and fro in six laboratories since 1954 (cf., Figure
2.2). Even when differences between activities do not disappear, the
entity can often no longer be traced after a few steps of purification. As
we shall see later, the elimination of these elusive and transitory
substances (known as "artefacts") is the main concern of the tribe.
Although the details of the elimination process are extremely complex,
the general principle is simple.
   Since most competitors" claims to have an "isolated" substance are
put into quotation marks, it follows that the assertion that an entity is
"isolated" depends primarily on the operation of local criteria. When
this claim has been made within the laboratory, the chemical fraction
breaks out of the shuttle between assay and purification and switches
to another circuit of operations. This new circuit comprises an
inscription device known as an Amino Acid Analyser (AAA), which
automatically records the effects of the isolated sample on a series of
other chemical "reagents" and allows this effect to be directly read in
terms of certain letters of the amino acid vocabulary. Thus, the
inscription of the substance is decipherable in letters, such as, for
example, Glu, Pyro, His, rather than just in terms of peaks, spots, and
slopes. However, this is not the end of the matter. By this stage, each
component amino acid is known; but the particular order of the amino
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                             61

acids has not yet been determined. To do this, the previous samples are
taken to another room, where there are expensive inscription devices
handled by full-time "PhD holders." The two main inscription
devices, the "mass spectrometer" and the "Edmann degradation
sequence," provide written spectra and diagrams which allow the
specification of the configuration of amino acids which are present in
the substance. These are great and rare moments in the work of the first
programme. The determination of structure constitutes the most
exciting and exhausting periods of work, which are remembered
vividly by participants many years after. In the next chapter we shall
follow the history of one of these substances in detail and return to a
closer explanation of the activities mentioned here.
   The concern of a second main programme in the laboratory is to
reconstruct substances (whose structure has already been determined), using amino acids supplied by the chemical industry, and to
evaluate their activity. The main objective of this programme is to
produce artificially reconstructed substances, known as analogs, with
properties which, because they are different from the original substances, will facilitate their use in medicine or physiology. The second
research programme can be divided into four tasks. 10 The first task is
the chemical production of analogs. Instead of buying analogs or
obtaining them from another investigator, the laboratory can supply
substances relatively cheaply in its own inhouse chemical section. The
production of analogs is largely mechanised, using apparatus such as
the peptide automatic synthetizer. Many of the analytical inscription
devices (such as the mass spectrometer, the amino acid analyser, or
the nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer) which are used in the
original purification of a substance are also used in its artificial
reconstruction. In the second programme, however, these inscription
devices are used to monitor the reconstruction process rather than to
produce new information. The second task concerns so-called "structure function relationships." Using a number of slightly different
analogs, physiologists try to identify connections between bioassay
effects and combinations of analogs w h i c h give rise to them. For
example, the natural substance which inhibits the release of a
substance called growth hormone, is a fourteen amino acid structure.
By substituting a right-handed form for the left-handed form of the
amino acid at the eighth position, a more potent substance is obtained.
This has major implications for the treatment of diabetes. Consequently, the outcome of these kinds of trial and error operations, which
62                                                             LABORATORY LIFE


make up 24 percent of p u b l i s h e d papers, are of special interest to
f u n d i n g agencies and to the chemical industry (Latour and Rivier,
 1977). A third task, w h i c h makes up to 9 percent of published papers,
concerns the determination of structure function relationships in the
effect of substances on h u m a n s . Most of the papers w h i c h result from
this work are written in collaboration with c l i n i c i a n s . The aim is to
devise analogs w h i c h most nearly match the natural substances
required for c l i n i c a l purposes. It would be desirable, for example, to
devise an analog of LRF w h i c h would i n h i b i t the release of LH instead
of triggering it. This would make possible the production of a much
better contraceptive p i l l than at present and thus represents a highly
prized (and h i g h l y funded) research objective. The fourth and last task,
which makes up only 3 percent of total research output, comprises
research in collaboration with f u n d a m e n t a l chemists on the configuration of molecules w h i c h make up the substance. The role of the
laboratory in this work is m a i n l y the provision of material, but the
results are nevertheless very important for studies of "structurefunction r e l a t i o n s h i p s . ' ' 1 1 As in the third task, first authors of papers
r e s u l t i n g from this fourth task are based outside the laboratory.
     So far we have discussed two main programmes: the isolation of new
natural substances on the one hand and their reproduction by synthesis
on the other. A third programme is said by participants to be aimed at
understanding the mechanisms by w h i c h different substances interact.
This work is carried out in the physiology section of the laboratory
using bioassays. A variety of different trails, ranging from those
generating crude behavioural responses to those which record the rate
of DNA synthesis following hormonal contact, are used to try and
assess how substances react together.
    In terms of published papers, these three programmes accounted
respectively for 15 percent, 37 percent, and 22 percent of the total
output from the laboratory between 1970 and 1976. It is rarely the
case, however, that participants refer to the programme in which they
are working. The specification and particular arrangement of apparatus does not in itself correspond to the self-perceptions of work
which they hold. Rather than saying, "I am doing purification," for
example, they are much more l i k e l y to say, "I am p u r i f y i n g substance
X." It is not purification in general w h i c h concerns them, but "the
isolation of CRF"; it is not the synthesis of analogs, but the study of
"D TRP 8 SS." Furthermore, objectives of each programme change in
the course of a few months. Our notion of programme is thus
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                  63


inadequate in that it is merely an intermediary device which our
observer has used in becoming f a m i l i a r with his setting. On the other
hand, our observer now knows what distinguishes this laboratory from
others and which papers are written on the basis of p a r t i c u l a r
combinations of staff and inscription devices. We reserve for later
discussion an appraisal of laboratory activity in terms of specific
individuals, careers, historical periods, and items of apparatus.
                   THE "PHENOMENOTECHNIQUE"

   We have so far related how our observer apprehended the laboratory in terms of the prevalence of written documents and of inscription
devices. In particular, the notion of literature provided an organising
principle with which the observer could make sense of his observations
without relying solely on participants' accounts. ''Literature" refers
both to the central importance accorded a variety of documents and to
the use of equipment to produce inscriptions which are taken to be
about a substance, and which are themselves used in the further
generation of articles and papers. In order to explicate the notion of
literary inscription as applied to apparatus, we shall provide an
inventory of the material setting of the laboratory.
   One important feature of the use of inscription devices in the
laboratory is that once the end product, an inscription, is available, all
the intermediary steps which made its production possible are forgotten. The diagram or sheet of figures becomes the focus of discussion
between participants, and the material processes which gave rise to it
are either forgotten or taken for granted as being merely technical
matters. 12 A first consequence of the relegation of material processes
to the realm of the merely technical is that inscriptions are seen as
direct indicators of the substance under study. Especially in apparatus such as the amino acid analyser (Photograph 9), the substance
appears to inscribe its own signature (Spackmann et al., 1958). A
second consequence, however, is the tendency to t h i n k of the inscription in terms of confirmation, or evidence for or against, particular
ideas, concepts, or theories. 13 There thus occurs a transformation of
the simple end product of inscription into the terms of the mythology
which informs participants' activities. A particular curve, for example,
might constitute a breakthrough; or a sheet of figures can count as clear
support for some previously postulated theory.
   As we have already indicated, however, the cultural specificity of
the laboratory does not reside in the mythology available to partici-
64                                                        LABORATORY LIFE


pants. After all, similar mythologies are available in other laboratories.
Specific to this laboratory is the particular configurations of apparatus
that we have called inscription devices. The central importance of this
material arrangement is that none of the phenomena "about which"
participants talk could exist without it. Without a bioassay, for
example, a substance could not be said to exist. The bioassay is not
merely a means of obtaining some independently given entity; the
bioassay constitutes the construction of the substance. Similarly, a
substance could not be said to exist without fractionating columns
(Photograph 7), since a fraction only exists by virtue of the process of
discrimination. Likewise, the spectrum produced by a nuclear magnetic resonance ( N M R ) spectrometer (Photograph 8) would not exist
but for the spectrometer. It is not simply that phenomena depend on
certain material instrumentation; rather, the phenomena are thoroughly constituted by the material setting of the laboratory. The
a r t i f i c i a l reality, which participants describe in terms of an objective
entity, has in fact been constructed by the use of inscription devices.
Such a reality, w h i c h Bachelard ( 1 9 5 3 ) terms the "phenomenotechnique," takes on the appearance of a phenomenon by virtue of its
construction through material techniques.
     It follows that if our observer was to imagine the removal of certain
items of equipment from the laboratory, this would entail the removal
of at least one object of reality from discussion. This was particularly
apparent w h e n e v e r equipment broke down or w h e n e v e r new equipment was brought into the laboratory. 1 4 Obviously, however, not a l l
pieces of equipment condition the existence of phenomena and the
production of papers in the same way. Taking away the trash can, for
example, would be u n l i k e l y to harm the main research process;
s i m i l a r l y , withdrawal of the automatic pipette would not prevent
pipetting by hand, even though this takes longer. By contrast, if the
gamma counter breaks down, it is d i f f i c u l t to measure amounts of
radioactivity merely by sight! The observation of radioactivity is
e n t i r e l y dependent on the counter ( Yalow and Berson, 1 9 7 1 ) . Clearly,
the laboratory would stop operating without the pipes carrying water
and oxygen w h i c h run between the laboratory and the plant (Photograph 1), but they do not account for the fact that the laboratory
produces papers. Like Aristotle's notion of vegetative l i f e , these pipes
are a general condition of a superior life but they do not explain it.
However, whereas Photograph 1 could have been taken in any factory
setting, Photograph 3 is, by contrast, peculiar to a laboratory. This is
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                 65


because apart from the hair dryer, electric motor, and two hydrogen
bottles, all the other pieces of apparatus were invented specifically to
assist in the construction of laboratory objects. The centrifuge (on the
left of Photograph 3), for example, was devised by Svedberg in 1924
and was responsible for creating the notion of protein by allowing
undifferentiated substances to be discriminated by spinning (Pedersen, 1974). The molecular weight of proteins could hardly be said to
exist except by virtue of the ultracentrifuge. The Rotary Evaporator
(on the right of Photograph 3), invented by Craig at the Rockefeller
Institute in 1950 (Moore, 1975), enables the removal of solvents in
most laboratory purification processes and superceded the previous
use of the Claisen flask.
   It is clear, then, that some items of equipment are more crucial to the
research process than others. Indeed the strength of the laboratory
depends not so much on the availability of apparatus, but on the
presence of a particular configuration of machines specifically tailored
for a particular task. Photograph 3 does not define the particular field
in which the work of the laboratory is situated because centrifuges and
rotary evaporators can be found in a wide variety of biologically
inclined research institutions. However, the presence of bio- and
radioimmuno-assays, the Sephadex columns, and the whole gamut of
spectrometers, show that participants are concerned with neuroendocrinology. A whole range of inscription devices, variously used to
make points in different subfields, have been assembled in one place.
The mass spectrometer, for example, is used in the production of
papers on the structure of a substance; cell cultures are used to make
points about the synthesis of DNA in the biosynthesis of the same
substances.
   The cultural specificity of the laboratory is also evident from the fact
that some of its inscription devices can only be found in this setting.
Most of the substances depend for their existence on bio- and
radioimmuno-assays. Each assay comprises several hundred sequences, and sometimes occupies two or three people full time for
several days or weeks at a stretch. The instructions for one assay (the
TRF immunoassay) occupy six full pages and read like a complicated
recipe. Since only relatively small steps, such as pipetting, can be
automated, the process relies heavily on the routinised s k i l l s of the
technicians. As a whole, the assay is an idiosyncratic process in that it
depends on the skills of individual technicians and on the use of
particular antisera, which themselves have to be obtained from
66                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


particular goats at particular times of the year. This is why so many
substances exist only locally (see Chapter 4). The presence in this
setting of what scientists refer to as "an exquisite bioassay for growth
hormones" or of a "very sensitive assay for CRF" is highly valued by
members, and is the source both of their pride as well as the points they
make in the literature.
   It would be wrong to contrast the material with conceptual components of laboratory activity. The inscription devices, skills, and
machines which are now current have often featured in the past
literature of another field. Thus, each sequence of actions and each
routinised assay has at some stage featured as the object of debate in
another field and has been the focus of several published papers. The
apparatus and craft skills present in one field thus embody the end
results of debate or controversy in some other field and make these
results available within the walls of the laboratory. It is in this sense
that Bachelard (1953) referred to apparatus as "reified theory.'' The
inscription device provides inscriptions which can be used to write
papers or to make points in the literature on the basis of a transformation of established arguments into items of apparatus. This transformation, in turn, allows the generation of new inscriptions, new
arguments and potentially new items of apparatus (cf., Chapter 6).
When, for example, a member of the laboratory uses a computer
console (Photograph 11), he mobilises the power of both electronics
and statistics. When another member handles the NMR spectrometer
(Photograph 8) to check the purity of his compounds, he is utilising
spin theory and the outcome of some twenty years of basic physics
research. Although Albert knows little more than the general principles of spin theory, this is sufficient to enable him to handle the
switchboard of the NMR and to have the power of the theory working
to his advantage. When others discuss the spatial structure of a
releasing factor, they implicitly make use of decades of research in
elementary chemistry. Similarly, a few principles of immunology and
a general knowledge of radioactivity are sufficient to benefit from these
two sciences when using the radioimmunoassay in the quest for a new
substance (Yalow and Berson, 1971). Every move in the laboratory
thus relies in some way on other scientific fields. In Table 2.2 we list
some of the larger items of equipment used in the laboratory, together
with the field of origin and the date at which they were imported into
the new problem area. In the next chapter we shall see why much of this
equipment originated in fields thought to be "harder'' than endocrinology.
68                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


   Since the material setting represents the reification of knowledge
established in the literature of another field, there is necessarily a time
lag between the discussion of a theory in one field and the appearance
of a corresponding technique in another. This is confirmed by the dates
of first conception of various inscription devices. In general, inscription devices were derived from a well-established body of knowledge.
Chromatography, for example, is still an active research area of
chemistry. But the chromatography embodied in apparatus used in the
laboratory dates from Porath's work in the 1950s (Porath, 1967). The
mass spectrometer, a crucial analytical tool, is based on physics which
is some fifty years old (Beynon, 1960). The same is the case for the
laboratory's use of statistics and programming techniques. By borrowing well-established knowledge, and by incorporating it in pieces of
furniture or in routine operational sequences, the laboratory can
harness the enormous power of tens of other fields for its own
purposes.
   However, the accumulation of material theories and practices from
other fields itself depends on certain manufacturing skills. For
example, the mere existence of a discipline such as nuclear physics
does not in itself ensure the presence of a beta-counter in the
laboratory. Clearly, the use of such equipment presupposes their
manufacture. Without Merrifield's invention, for example, there
would be no solid phase synthesis and no way of automating peptide
synthesis (Merrifield, 1965; 1968). But even without a company like
Beckmann, there would still be a prototype at the Rockefeller Institute
where it was invented and this could be used by other scientists. Apart
from the automatic pipette, a simple time-saving device, both the
principle and basic prototype of all the other apparatus used in the
laboratory originated in other scientific laboratories. However, industry plays an important role in designing, developing, and m a k i n g
these scientific prototypes available to a larger public, as is clear if we
imagine that there were only one or two e x i s t i n g prototypes of each
item of new equipment. In this case, scientists would have to travel
vast distances and there would be a dramatic fall in the rate of
production of papers. The transformation of Merrifield's original
prototype into the marketable, self-contained, r e l i a b l e , and compact
item of equipment sold under the name of Automatic Peptide
Synthesizer, is a measure of the debt of the laboratory to technological
skills (Anonymous, 1976a). If inscription devices are the reification of
theories and practices, the actual pieces of equipment are the marketed
forms of these reifications.
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                    69


   The material layout of the laboratory has been constructed from
items of apparatus, many of which have long and sometimes controversial histories. Each item of apparatus has combined with certain
skills to form specific devices, the styluses and needles of which
scratch the surface of sheets of graph paper. The string of events to
which each curve owes it very existence is too long for any observer,
technician, or scientist to remember. And yet each step is crucial, for
its omission or mishandling can n u l l i f y the entire process. Instead of a
"nice curve,'' it is all too easy to obtain a chaotic scattering of random
points of curves which cannot be replicated. To counter these
catastrophic possibilities, efforts are made to routinise component
actions either through technicians' training or by automation. Once a
string of operations has been routinised, one can look at the figures
obtained and quietly forget that immunology, atomic physics, statistics, and electronics actually made this figure possible. Once the data
sheet has been taken to the office for discussion, one can forget the
several weeks of work by technicians and the hundreds of dollars
which have gone into its production. After the paper which incorporates these figures has been written, and the main result of the paper has
been embodied in some new inscription device, it is easy to forget that
the construction of the paper depended on material factors. The bench
space w i l l be forgotten, and the existence of laboratories will fade from
consideration. Instead, "ideas," "theories," and "reasons" will take
their place. Inscription devices thus appear to be valued on the basis of
the extent to which they facilitate a swift transition from craft work to
ideas. The material setting both makes possible the phenomena and is
required to be easily forgotten. Without the material environment of
the laboratory none of the objects could be said to exist, and yet the
material environment very rarely receives mention. It is this paradox,
which is an essential feature of science, that we shall now consider in
more detail.

Documents and Facts
   Thus far, our observer has begun to make sense of the laboratory in
terms of a tribe of readers and writers who spend two-thirds of their
time working with large inscription devices. They appear to have
developed considerable skills in setting up devices which can pin down
elusive figures, traces, or inscriptions in their craftwork, and in the art
of persuasion. The latter skill enables them to convince others that
70                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


what they do is important, that what they say is true, and that their
proposals are worth funding. They are so s k i l l f u l , indeed, that they
manage to convince others not that they are being convinced but that
they are simply following a consistent line of interpretation of
available evidence. Others are persuaded that they are not persuaded,
that no mediations intercede between what is said and the truth. They
are so persuasive, in fact, that within the confines of their laboratory it
is possible to forget the material dimensions of the laboratory, the
bench work, and the influence of the past, and to focus only on the
"facts" that are being pointed out. Not surprisingly, our anthropological observer experienced some dis-ease in handling such a tribe.
Whereas other tribes believe in gods or complicated mythologies, the
members of this tribe insist that their activity is in no way to be
associated with beliefs, a culture, or a mythology. Instead, they claim
to be concerned only with "hard facts." The observer is puzzled
precisely because his informants insist that everything is straightforward. Moreover, they argue that if he were a scientist himself, he
would understand this. Our anthropologist is sorely tempted by this
argument. He has begun to learn about the laboratory, he has read lots
of papers and can recognise different substances. Furthermore, he
begins to understand fragments of conversation between members. His
informants begin to sway him. He begins to admit that there is nothing
strange about this setting and nothing which requires explanation in
terms other than those of informants' own accounts. However, in the
back of his mind there remains a nagging question. How can we
account for the fact that in any one year, approximately one and a half
million dollars is spent to enable twenty-five people to produce forty
papers?
   Apart from the papers themselves, of course, another kind of
product provides the means for generating documents in other laboratories. As we said above, two of the m a i n objectives of this laboratory
are the purification of natural substances and the manufacture of
analogs of known substances. Frequently, purified fractions and
samples of synthetic substances are sent to investigators in other
laboratories. Each analog is produced at an average cost of $ 1,500, or
$10 per milligram, which is much lower than the market value of these
peptides. Indeed, the market value of all peptides produced by the
laboratory would amount to $ 1.5 million, the same as the total budget
of the laboratory. In other words, the laboratory could pay for its
research by selling its analogs. However, the quantities, the number,
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                               71


and the nature of the peptides actually produced by the laboratory are
such that there is no market for 99 percent of them. Moreover, nearly
all the peptides (90 percent) are manufactured for internal consumption and are not available as output. The actual output (for example,
3.2 grams in 1976) is potentially worth $1 30,000 at market value, and
although it cost only $30,000 to produce, samples are sent free of
charge to outside researchers who have been able to convince one of
the members of the laboratory that his or her research is of interest.
Although members of the laboratory do not require their names to
appear on papers which report work resulting from the use of these
samples, the ability to provide rare and costly analogs is a powerful
resource. If, for example, only a few micrograms were made available,
this would effectively prevent the recipient from carrying out sufficient
investigations to make a discovery (see Chapter 4). 1 5 Purified substances and rare antisera are also considered valuable assets. When,
for example, a participant talks about leaving the group, he often
expresses concern about the fate of the antiseras, fractions, and
samples for which he has been responsible. It is these, together with the
papers he has produced, that represent the riches needed by a
participant to enable him to settle elsewhere and write further papers.
He is likely to find similar inscription devices elsewhere, but not the
idiosyncratic antisera that permit a specific radioimmunoassay to be
run. Besides samples, the laboratory also produces skills in the
 members of a workforce who from time to time leave the laboratory to
work elsewhere. Here again, the skill is only a means to the end of
publishing a paper.
   The production of papers is acknowledged by participants as the
main objective of their activity. The realisation of this objective
necessitates a chain of writing operations from a result first scribbled
on a sheet of paper and enthusiastically communicated to colleagues,
to the final registering of published literature in the laboratory
archives. The many intermediary stages (such as talks with slides,
circulation of preprints, and so on) all concern literary production of
one kind or another. It is thus necessary carefully to study the various
processes of literary production which lead to the output of papers. We
shall do this in two ways. Firstly, we shall consider papers as objects in
much the same way as manufactured goods. Secondly, we shall
attempt to make sense of the content of papers. By looking at literary
production in this way we hope to broach the central questions posed
by our observer: how can a paper be both so expensive to produce and
72                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


yet so highly valued? What exactly can justify participants' faith in the
importance of the papers' contents?

                       THE PUBLICATION LIST

   The range and scope of papers produced by the laboratory is
indicated by a list kept and updated by participants. We used those
items listed between 1970 and 1976. Although referred to by participants as the "publication list," a number of articles were included
which had not in fact been published. 1 6
   Let us classify output according to the channel chosen by investigators. Fifty percent consisted of "regular" papers. Such items
comprised several pages and were published in professional journals.
Twenty percent of the output comprised abstracts submitted to
professional congresses. A further 16 percent comprised solicited
contributions to meetings, only half of which found their way into print
as conference proceedings. Participants also contributed chapters to
edited collections of papers, which made up 14 percent of the total
output.
   Another way of classifying papers is by the literary "genre" of
articles. Differences in genre were defined both in terms of formal
characteristics (such as the size, style, and format of each article) and
by the nature of the audience. For example, 5 percent of all papers
were addressed to lay audiences, such as lay readers of Scientific
American, Triangle, and Science Year or to physicians for whom a
simplified account of recent progress in biology is available in articles,
such as those in Clinician, Contraception, or Hospital Practice.
Although a relatively minor output in terms of quantity, this genre
fulfills an important public relations function in that such articles can
be useful in the long-term acquisition of public funds. A second genre,
which made up 27 percent of total output, addressed scientists working
outside the releasing factors field. Sample titles included: "Hypothalamus Releasing Hormones," "Physiology and Chemistry of the
Hypothalamus," and "Hypothalamic Hormones: Isolation, Characterisation and Structure Function." The details of specific substances
and assays or of the relations between them were rarely discussed in
these kinds of articles, which could be found most frequently in
advanced textbooks, reference books, nonspecialised journals, book
reviews, and invited lectures. The information in these articles was
often utilised by students or by colleagues in outside fields. Such
papers are both incomprehensible to laymen and unremarkable to
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                73


colleagues within the field of releasing factors. They simply summarize the state of the art for scientists outside the field. A third genre,
which made up 13 percent of the total output, included titles such as:
"Luteinizing Releasing Factor and Somatostatin Analogs: Structure
Function Relationships," "Biological Activities of SS," and "Chemistry and Physiology of Ovine and Synthetic TRF and LRF." These
articles were specialised to the extent that they made little sense
outside the specialty. They were characterised by an unusually high
number of coauthors (5.7 compared with an average of 3.8 for all
papers) and were usually presented at professional meetings within the
field such as the Endocrine Society Meetings and Peptide Chemistry
Symposia. Articles in this third genre enabled colleagues to catch up
on the latest available information. Lastly, a genre which made up 55
percent of the total output comprised highly specialised articles as
indicated by the following example titles: "(Gly) 2LRF and Des His
LRF. The synthesis purification and characterisation of two LRF
analogs antagonists to LRF" and "Somatostatin inhibits the release of
acetylcholine induced electrically in the myenteric plexus." Such
articles, which aimed to convey minute pieces of information to a
select band of insiders, were published mainly in journals such as
Endocrinology (18 percent), BBRC (10 percent), and Journal of
Medical Chemistry (10 percent). Whereas papers falling within the
first and second genres were thought to be important in a teaching
context, only those articles in the latter two genres (the insider reviews
and specialised articles) were regarded by members of the laboratory
as containing new information.
   By dividing the annual budget of the laboratory by the number of
articles published (and at the same time discounting those articles in
the laymen's genre), our observer calculated that the cost of producing
a paper was $60,000 in 1975 and $30,000 in 1976. Clearly, papers
were an expensive commodity! This expenditure appears needlessly
extravagant if papers have no impact, and extravagantly cheap if
papers have fundamental implications for either basic or applied
research. It may therefore be appropriate to interpret this expenditure
in relation to the reception of papers.
   One preliminary method of examining the cost of production in
relation to the received value of papers is through an examination of
citation histories. Our observer used the SCI to trace the citations of
the 213 items 17 published by participants between 1970 and 1976.
Items that were not cited (articles by laymrn, unpublished lectures,
74                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


and abstracts that were difficult to obtain) were then weeded out and
the remainder divided into those highly likely to be cited and those
(usually chapters of books or abstracts) that were not. Since the peak
of citation activity rarely occurred later than the fourth year following
publication, the observer calculated an index of each item's impact
based on citations in the year of publication and in the subsequent two
years.
   The overall impact ratio (number of citations per item) was 12.4 c.p.i.
for the five years for which it could be calculated (1970-1974).
However, this figures conceals three main sources of variation.
Firstly, impact ratio varied according to genre. For example, when
only "regular" papers were considered, the impact ratio rose to 20
c.p.i. Furthermore, only 17 of the items identified as "regular" papers
and published in what participants referred to as "good" journals had
no impact whatsoever before the end of 1976. Secondly, impact ratio
varied overtime. It was 23.2 c.p.i. for the 10 items published in 1970,
but only 8 c.p.i. for the 39 items published in 1974. This particular
variation is explained by the fact that 1970 was the year of a major
discovery (see Chapter 3). Thirdly, as is evident from the right-hand
column of Table 2.1, impact ratio also varied by programme. Of the
three programmes we characterised earlier, those items concerning the
isolation and characterisation of substances had the highest impact
ratio (24 c.p.i.). Only one other category of activity, production of
analogs carried out in collaboration with clinicians (task three of the
second programme), had comparable impact (21 c.p.i.). Items resulting
from other activities had much less impact. The third programme, for
example, made up 22 percent of overall output (in terms of items
produced) but had an impact ratio of only 10.6 c.p.i. Task two of the
second programme made up a similar proportion of overall output (24
percent) but had even less impact (7.6 c.p.i.).
   If impact ratio is taken as a crude indicator of return on the initial
costs of producing items of literature, it is clear that a higher level of
return is not necessarily guaranteed by increased output. One dominant
factor would appear to be the extent to which items can appear as
"regular" papers. However, this is confused both by variations over
time and by the particular activity associated with each item. We are
left, therefore, with the somewhat tautological speculation that items
which yield a high return are those with a high chance of addressing
issues of concern outside the laboratory.
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                                   75


                                 STATEMENT TYPES

   Although citations revealed that items had varying impact, our
observer felt that he had discovered little about why this was the case.
One reaction to this kind of problem is to engage in more sophisticated
and complex mathematical analysis of citation histories, in the hope
that some clearly identifiable pattern of citations w i l l emerge. 18 But our
observer was unconvinced that this would alleviate his basic d i f f i c u l t y
of understanding why items were cited in the first place. Instead, he
reasoned that there must be something in the content of papers which
would explain how they were evaluated. Accordingly, our observer
began to peruse some of the articles in order to ferret out possible
reasons for t h e i r relative value. Alas, it was all Chinese to him! Many
of the terms were recognisable as the names of substances, or of
apparatus and chemicals w h i c h he had already come across. He also
felt that the grammar and the basic structure of sentences was not
d i s s i m i l a r to those he used himself. But he felt e n t i r e l y u n a b l e to grasp
the "meaning" of these papers, let alone understand how such meaning
sustained an entire c u l t u r e . He was reminded m o m e n t a r i l y of an
e a r l i e r study of religious r i t u a l s w h e n , h a v i n g penetrated to the core of
ceremonial behaviour, he had found only t w a d d l i n g and waffling. In a
s i m i l a r way, he had now discovered that the end products of a complex
series of operations contained complete gibberish. In desperation he
turned to participants. But his requests for clarification of the meaning
of papers were met with retorts that the papers had no interest or
significance in themselves: they were only a means of communicating
"important findings." When further asked about the nature of these
findings, participants merely repeated a s l i g h t l y modified version of
the content of the papers. They argued that the observer was baffled
because his obsessive interest in literature had blinded him to the real
importance of the papers: only by abandoning his interest in the papers
themselves could the observer grasp the "true meaning" of the "facts"
w h i c h the paper contained.
    Our observer might have become e x t r e m e l y depressed by participants" scorn, were it not for the fact that participants immediately
resumed their discussion of drafts, the correction and recorrection of
galley proofs, and the interpretation of various traces and figures
w h i c h had just been produced by inscription devices. At the very least,
reasoned our observer, there must be a strong r e l a t i o n s h i p between
processes of literary i n s c r i p t i o n and the "true meaning" of papers.
76                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


   The above disagreement between observer and participant hinged
on a paradox which had already been hinted at several times during
this chapter. The production of a paper depends critically on various
processes of writing and reading which can be summarised as literary
inscription. The function of literary inscription is the successful
persuasion of readers, but the readers are only fully convinced when all
sources of persuasion seem to have disappeared. In other words, the
various operations of writing and reading which sustain an argument
are seen by participants to be largely irrelevant to "facts," which
emerge solely by virtue of these same operations. There is, then, an
essential congruence between a "fact" and the successful operation of
various processes of literary inscription. A text or statement can thus
be read as "containing" or "being about a fact" when readers are
sufficiently convinced that there is no debate about it and the processes
of literary inscription are forgotten. Conversely, one way of undercutting the "facticity" of a statement is by drawing attention to the
(mere) processes of literary inscription which make the fact possible.
With this in mind, our observer decided to look carefully at the
different kind of statements to be found in the papers. In particular, he
was concerned to delineate the extent to which some statements
appeared more fact-like than others.
   At one extreme, readers are so persuaded of the existence of facts
that no explicit reference is made to them. In other words, various
items of knowledge are simply taken for granted and utilised in the
course of an argument whose main burden is the explicit demonstration of some other fact. Consequently, it was difficult when reading
articles consciously to note the occurrence of taken-for-granted facts.
Instead, they merged imperceptibly into a background of routine
enquiry, skills, and tacit knowledge. It was obvious to our observer,
however, that everything taken as self-evident in the laboratory was
likely to have been the subject of some dispute in earlier papers. In the
intervening period a gradual shift had occurred whereby an argument
had been transformed from an issue of hotly contested discussion into
a well-known, unremarkable and noncontentious fact. The observer
therefore posited a five-fold classificatory scheme corresponding to
different types of statements. Statements corresponding to a taken-forgranted fact were denoted type 5 statements. Precisely because they
were taken for granted, our observer found that such statements rarely
featured in discussions between laboratory members, except when
newcomers to the laboratory required some introduction to them. The
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                77


greater the ignorance of a newcomer, the deeper the informant was
required to delve into layers of implicit knowledge, and the farther into
the past. Beyond a certain point, persistent questioning by the
newcomer about "things that everybody knew" was regarded as
socially inept. In the course of one discussion, for example, X
repeatedly argued that "in the grid test rats do not react as if they were
on neuroleptics." For X, the force of the argument was clear. But for
Y, a scientist working in a different field, there were preliminary
questions to ask: "What do you mean by a grid test?" Somewhat
taken aback, X stopped, looked at Y, and adopted the tone of a teacher
reading from a textbook: "The classic catalepsy test is a vertical screen
test. You have a wire mesh. You put the animal on the wire mesh and an
animal which has been injected with neuroleptic will remain in this
position. An animal which is untreated, will just climb down" (IX, 83).
For X, his earlier reference to the assay was a type 5 statement which
required no further explication. After this interruption, X adopted his
previous excited tone and returned to the original argument.
   Scientific textbooks were found to contain a large number of
sentences with the stylistic form: "A has a certain relationship with
B." For example, "Ribosomal proteins begin to bind to pre-RNA soon
after its transcription starts" (Watson, 1976: 200). Expressions of this
sort could be said to be type 4 statements. Although the relationship
presented in this statement appears uncontroversial, it is, by contrast
with type 5 statements, made explicit. This type of statement is often
taken as the prototype of scientific assertion. However, our observer
found this type of statement to be relatively rare in the work of
scientists in the laboratory. More commonly, type 4 statements formed
part of the accepted knowledge disseminated through teaching texts.
   Another kind of statement consisted of expressions with the form,
"A has a certain relationship with B," which were embedded in other
expressions: "It is still largely unknown which factors cause the
hypothalamus to withhold stimuli to the gonads" (Scharrer and
Scharrer, 1963). "Oxytocin is generally assumed to be produced by
the neurosecretory cells of the paraventricular nuclei" (Olivecrona,
 1957; Nibbelink, 1961 ). These were referred to as type 3 statements.
They contained statements about other statements w h i c h our observer
referred to as modalities.19 By deleting modalities from type 3
statements it is possible to obtain type 4 statements. The difference
between statements in textbooks and the above, many of w h i c h
appeared in review articles (Greimas, 1976), can thus be charac-
78                                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


terised by the presence or absence of modalities. A statement clearly
takes on a different form when modalities drop. Thus, to state, "The
structure of GH.RH was reported to be X" is not the same as saying,
"The structure of GH.RH is X." Our observer found many different
types of modality. One form of statement, for example, included a
reference and a date in addition to the basic assertion. In other
statements, modalities comprised expressions relating to the merit of
the author or to the priority of work which had i n i t i a l l y postulated the
relationship in question: "[T]his method has first been described by
Pietta and Marshall. Various investigators clearly established [ref.]
 . . . .'' "More convincing evidence was provided by [ r e f . ] . . . . "
"[T]he first unequivocal demonstration was provided by [ r e f . ] . . . ."
( a l l quotations from Scharrer and Scharrer, 1963).
    As mentioned above, many type 3 statements were found in review
discussions. Much more common among the papers and drafts
circulated in the laboratory were statements w h i c h appeared rather
more contentious than those in reviews.

     Recently Odell [ r e f . ] has reported that h y p o t h a l a m i c tissues, when
     incubated . . . woud increase the amount of TSH. It is d i f f i c u l t to
     ascertain whether or not . . . .
     At this time we do not know whether the long acting effect of these
     compounds extract to their potential inhibitory activity (Scharrer and
     Scharrer, 1963).
Statements of this form appeared to our observer to more nearly
constitute claims rather than established facts. This was because the
modalities which encompassed expressions of basic relationships
seemed to draw attention to the circumstances affecting the. basic
relationship. Statements containing these kinds of modalities were
designated type 2 statements. For example:

     There is a large body of evidence to support the concept of a control of
     the pituitary by the brain.
     The role of nitrogen 1 and nitrogen 3 of the imidazole ring of h i s t i d i n e in
     TRF and LRF seems to be d i f f e r e n t .
     It is u n l i k e l y that racemization occurs d u r i n g esterification with any of
     the above procedures, but l i t t l e e x p e r i m e n t a l evidence is available to
     support this point (Scharrer and Scharrer, 1963).

More precisely, type 2 statements could be identified as containing
modalities which draw attention to the generality of available evidence
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                            79


(or the lack of it). Basic relationships are thus embedded within
appeals to "what is generally known" or to "what might reasonably be
thought to be the case.'' The modalities in type 2 statements sometimes
take the form of tentative suggestions, usually oriented to further
investigations which may elucidate the value of the relationship at
issue:

   It should not be forgotten that hypothalamic tissues contain non-
   negligible quantities of TSH . . . which may further complicate the
   interpretation of the data. . . It would be interesting to ascertain whether
   or not their material is similar. . . . It is somewhat puzzling that . . .
   (Scharrer and Scharrer, 1963).

   Type 1 statements comprise conjectures or speculations (about a
relationship) which appear most commonly at the end of papers, or in
private discussions:

   Peter [ r e f . ) has suggested that in goldfish the hypothalamus has an
   inhibitory effect on the secretion of TSH.
   There is also this guy in Colorado. They claim that t h e y have got a
   precursor for H . . . . I just got the preprint of t h e i r paper ( I I I , 70).
   It may also signify that not everything seen, said and reasoned about
   opiates may necessarily be applicable for the endorphins.

   By this stage, then, our observer had identified five different types of
statement. At first glance it seemed that these types could be arranged
in a broad continuum such that type 5 statements represented the most
fact-like entities and type 1 the most speculative assertions. It would
follow that changes in statement type would correspond to changes in
fact-like status. For example, the deletion of modalities in a type 3
statement would leave a type 4 statement, whose facticity would be
correspondingly enhanced. At a general level, the notion that changes
in statement type may correspond to changes in facticity seems
plausible enough. At the level of empirical verification, however, this
general scheme encounters certain d i f f i c u l t i e s .
   In any given instance, there seems to be no simple r e l a t i o n s h i p
between the form of a statement and the level of facticity w h i c h it
expresses. This can be demonstrated, for example, by considering a
statement w h i c h contains an assertion about the r e l a t i o n s h i p between
two variables together with a reference. As it stands, our observer
would classify this statement as a type 3 where the modality is
80                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


constituted by the included reference. Undoubtedly, the deletion of the
modality would leave a type 4 statement. It is questionable, however,
whether this would enhance or detract from the fact-like status of the
statement. On the one hand, we could argue that the inclusion of a
reference draws attention to circumstances surrounding the establishment of the relationship in question and that this, by implication,
renders the relationship less indisputable and hence less likely to be
taken for granted. By noting that human agency was involved in its
production, the inclusion of a reference diminishes the likelihood that
the statement will be accepted as an "objective fact of nature." On the
other hand, it could be argued that the inclusion of a reference lends
weight to a statement which otherwise appears to be an unsupported
assertion. Thus, it is only by virtue of the reference that the statement
achieves any degree of facticity.
   The determination of the correct or more appropriate interpretation
of the function of a modality will depend critically on our knowledge of
the context in each particular case. If, for example, we have good
grounds for supposing that the inclusion of a modality in a paper was a
presentational device designed to enhance the acceptance of a
statement, then the onus is upon us to provide details of the context in
which this device was so used. There are, of course, those who argue
that this kind of determinate relationship between context and a
particular interpretation of a statement simply does not exist. For our
purposes, however, it is sufficient to note that changes in the type of
statement provide the possibility of changes in the fact-like status of
statements. Even though, in any individual instance, we may not be
able unambiguously to specify the direction of change in facticity, we
retain the possibility that such changes can correspond to changes in
statement types.
   Because he was aware of the problems both of specifying the factlike status of any given statement and of specifying the direction of
change of facticity in any example, our observer felt he could not stake
a great deal on the determinacy of correspondence between statement
type and fact-like status. Nevertheless, he realised that the notion of
literary inscription had provided a useful tool. Although he understood
little of the content of the papers he was reading, he had developed a
simple grammatical technique for distinguishing between types of
statements. This, he felt, enabled him to approach the very substance
of scientists' statements without having entirely to rely on participants
for elucidation or assistance. Furthermore, to the extent that changes
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                   81


in the grammatical form of scientists' statements provided the possibility of changes in their content (or fact-like status), he could portray
laboratory activity as a constant struggle for the generation and
acceptance of particular types of statement.

           THE TRANSFORMATION OF STATEMENT TYPES

   Despite the simplicity of the classificatory scheme presented above
(and summarized in Figure 2.3), it at least provided our anthropologist
with a tentative means of ordering his observations of the laboratory
which was consistent with his earlier notion of literary inscription.
Activity in the laboratory had the effect of transforming statements
from one type to another. The aim of the game was to create as many
statements as possible of type 4 in the face of a variety of pressures to
submerge assertions in modalities such that they became artefacts. In
short, the objective was to persuade colleagues that they should drop
all modalities used in relation to a particular assertion and that they
should accept and borrow this assertion as an established matter of
fact, preferably by citing the paper in which it appeared. But how
precisely is this achieved? What exactly are the operations which
successfully transform statements?
   Consider the following example, in which John interrupts K's
description of an assay in which the effect of LH had apparently been
blocked.
   John:    Since melatonin inhibits LH we cannot be sure that you are not
            simply measuring melatonin.
   K:       I don't believe these data on the release of LH by melatonin . . .
            not in my system (VI, 18).

 Instead of simply accepting K's previous statement, John adds a
 modality ("we can not be sure") to the unstated assumption that the
 investigators were "not simply measuring melatonin." John thus casts
doubt on an original unstated, and hence type 5 statement by using a
qualification about the consensual certainty which investigators
("we") are entitled to assume. As a result, the original type 5 statement
is transformed into a highly conjectural type 2 statement. The
transformation is made particularly effective in this case by the
preceding justification for investigator's lack of sureness. "Since
melatonin inhibits LH" constitutes the use of a type 4 statement to
justify the addition of a modality to the originally unstated assumption.
K's response attempts to recast John's justificatory type 4 statement
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                               83


by adding a modality. By "not believing" circumstances surrounding
the establishment of "melatonin inhibits LH," K tries to undercut
John's attempt to undercut the unstated assumption that "you are not
simply measuring melatonin."
   A second example is an excerpt from a paper written by John: 'Our
original observations (ref.) of the effects of somatostatin on the
secretion of TSH have now been confirmed in other laboratories
(ref.)." John had written an earlier paper, to which he first refers, and
the statements contained therein had been subsequently confirmed.
Whereas the statement, "the effects of somatostatin on the secretion of
TSH," had originally appeared as a claim of type 2, it now appears as
an assertion embedded within references and enhanced by the modality "have now been confirmed." In this way, John was able to borrow a
statement made by others in order to transform his own initial
statement into type 3.
   The above examples demonstrate the use of two related operations.
The first effects a change in the existing modality which can either
enhance or detract from the facticity of a given statement. The second
borrows an existing statement type in such a way that its facticity can
be either enhanced or diminished (Latour, 1976).
   The observer was now able to think of what had previously appeared
a confused mixture of papers in terms of a network of texts containing a
multitude of statements. The network itself comprised a large body of
operations on and between these statements. It would thus be possible
to document the history of a particular assertion as it became
transformed from one statement type into another and as its factual
status was continually diminished or enhanced as the result of various
operations. We have already specified, in a preliminary way, the
nature of operations by which statement types becomes transformed.
Let us now examine in more detail one criterion for the success of an
operation.
   Our observer recalled that the inscriptions produced by certain
configurations of apparatus were "taken seriously" if they could be
read as being the same as other inscriptions produced under the same
conditions. In simple terms, participants were more convinced that an
inscription unambiguously related to a substance "out there," if a
similar inscription could also be found. In the same way, an important
factor in the acceptance of a statement was the recognition by others of
another statement which was similar. The combination of two or more
apparently similar statements concretised the existence of some
84                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


external object or objective condition of which the statements were
taken to be indicators. Sources of "subjectivity" thus disappeared in
the face of more than one statement, and the initial statement could be
taken at face value and without qualification (cf., Silverman, 1975). It
is in this manner that our scientists, when noticing a peak on the
spectrum of a Chromatograph, sometimes rejected it as noise. If,
however, the same peak was seen to occur more than once (under what
were regarded an independent circumstances), it was often said that
there was a substance there of which the peaks were a trace. An
"object" was thus achieved through the superimposition of several
statements or documents in such a way that all the statements were
seen to relate to something outside of, or beyond, the reader's or
author's subjectivity. 20 Similarly, the introduction, or rather the
reintroduction, of an author's subjectivity as essentially linked to the
production of a statement could be used to diminish the factual status
of the statement. In the laboratory, "objects" were accomplished by
the superimposition of several documents obtained from inscription
devices within the laboratory or from papers by investigators outside
the laboratory (cf., Chapter 4). No statement could be made except on
the basis of available documents; statements were thus loaded with
documents and modalities which constituted an evaluation of the
statement. Consequently, grammatical modalities ("maybe," "definitely established," "unlikely," "not confirmed") often acted like
price tags of statements, or, to use a mechanical analogy, like an
expression of the weight of a statement. By adding or withdrawing
layers of documents, scientists could increase or decrease qualifications and hence the weight of the statement was modified accordingly.
For example, one referee's report included the following: "The
conclusion that the effect of Pheno . . . [to] release PRL in vivo is
mediated through the hypothalmus is premature." Three references
were then given, which further pulled the rug from under the authors
conclusion. Thus, although the author had presented his statement as a
type 2 or 3, the referee recast it in terms of type 1. Consider also the
following: "The authors used a Polytron which is a much more
vigorous means of tissue disruption. To my knowledge, there are no
reports in the literature of successful subcellular fractionation of brain
tissue disruption." In this case the referee cast doubt on the use of a
machine which produced the documents on which the argument is
based. This was done by reference to a notable absence of any
statements which might justify and hence enhance the authors' original
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                               85


claim. As a result, the authors' (unsupported) claim must be read in
conjunction with diminishing modalities such as "there is no support
for this" and is consequently to be regarded as worthless.
   With the notion of operations between (and on) statements in the
literature, our observer began to feel more confident in his ability to
understand the layout of individual papers. As a brief indication of the
scope of the analysis which this permitted, let us look closely at one of
the papers produced by the laboratory (Latour, 1976; Latour and
Fabri, 1977).
   The introductory paragraph refers to four articles, previously
published by members of the laboratory, in which they posited the
structure of a particular substance B. This referencing can be read as
the invocation of documents which bear upon the present problem.
More specifically, the use of these past papers can be read as providing
support for the present enterprise. (The grounds for this particular
reading are simply that the four papers themselves received 400
citations, all of which appear confirmatory.) At the same time,
however, the papers are themselves taken as statement type 3, for
which further support is to be provided by the present argument: "this
short note reports data obtained in rats which confirm and expand our
early results." The three following paragraphs summarize the way in
which inscription devices were set up so as to obtain data. The
information appears here in the form of type 5 statements. In other
words, knowledge is invoked which is so common to an audience of
potential readers that no citations are necessary: "All synthetic
preparations of substance B had full biological activity as ascertained
in 4 or 6 point assays in vitro with factorial analysis."
   In each of the next statements from the "results" section of the
paper, reference is made to a figure.
   "The results shown in Fig. 2 demonstrate that substance B
significantly lowers blood levels of GH for 20 to 40 mn but not for 40 to
50 mn." Each figure thus acts as a tidied representation of documents
(obtained from a radioimmunoassay) which is used in the text to
support a particular point. It is not simply that "the results demonstrate that. . . ." Rather, these results have an external reference and
an independent existence which can be supported by the presence of
"Fig. 2." The inclusion of "shown in Fig. 2" can thus provide an
enhanced reading of an otherwise unsupported claim about the results.
Subsequent discussion comprises three paragraphs, which refer back
to the former "results" section ("These experiments show that....").
86                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


The "results" section is itself based on figures which are, in turn,
dependent on the inscription devices described earlier. The result of
this accumulation of back references is an impression of objectivity:
the "fact" that "synthetic substance B inhibits GH in rats" can be
taken by the reader as independent of the author's subjectivity and thus
worthy of belief.
   At the same time the establishment of one statement opens up
discussion of others: "The mechanisms of action of the barbiturate
in . . . are not well understood." The modality "are not well understood" is not intended to diminish some prior claim about "the
mechanisms of action of the barbiturate." Instead, its inclusion in this
context amounts to a tentative suggestion for areas of future work. The
statement is thus of type 1 or 2. As a result, subsequent discussion
focuses on this statement as a new proposition: "[W]e might as well
envisage them [the mechanisms] as involving inhibition of secretion of
endogenous substance B, a hypothesis which is not incompatible with
the data." Finally, the new statement is linked to a deontic operation: 21
"This hypothesis will best be approached by some type of radioimmunoassay still to be developed."
   It should not be forgotten, however, that this paper is itself part of a
long series of operations within the field. The SCI shows that between
1974 and 1977 this paper received 62 explicit citations from 53
papers. Of these, 31 appear simply to have borrowed the conclusion
(that synthetic substance B inhibits GH as well as natural substance B
in the rat) as a fact and used it in their introduction; eight papers
focused solely on the final deontic operations in the paper in pursuing
the suggestion for further work; two papers by the same author cited
the above paper as confirmatory evidence of his own earlier work; and
four papers used fresh data further to confirm the original statement.
Only one paper raised doubts about the use of the assay in obtaining
one of the figures mentioned in the fifth statement ("there are
discrepancies between their results and ours"). This one paper
examined above thus provided the focus of a variety of operations
performed by later articles. Its weight depended both on its use of
earlier literature, inscription devices, documents, and statements as
well as on subsequent reaction to it.

Conclusion
  A laboratory is constantly performing operations on statements;
adding modalities, citing, enhancing, diminishing, borrowing, and
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                87

proposing new combinations. Each of these operations can result in a
statement which is either different or merely qualified. Each statement, in turn, provides the focus for similar operations in other
laboratories. Thus, members of our laboratory regularly noticed how
their own assertions were rejected, borrowed, quoted, ignored, confirmed, or dissolved by others. Some laboratories were seen to be
engaged in the frequent manipulation of statements while elsewhere
there was thought to be little activity. Some groups produce almost at a
loss: they talk and publish, but no one operates on their statements. In
such a case, a statement can remain cast as a type 1, a claim lingering in
an operational limbo. By contrast, other assertions can be seen to
change their status rapidly, following a kind of alternate dance, as they
are proven, disproven, and proven again. Despite the large number of
operations performed on them, they rarely change their form radically.
These statements represent a mere fraction of the hundreds of artefacts
and half-born statements which stagnate like a vast cloud of smog.
Commonly, attention shifts from these to other statements. In some
places, however, we can discern a clearer picture. One or other
operation irrevocably annihilates a statement never to be taken up
again. Or, by contrast, in situations where a statement is quickly
borrowed, used and reused, there quickly comes a stage where it is no
longer contested. Amidst the general Brownian agitation, a fact has
then been constituted. This is a comparatively rare event, but when it
occurs, a statement becomes incorporated in the stock of taken-forgranted features which have silently disappeared from the conscious
concerns of daily scientific activity. The fact becomes incorporated in
graduate text books or perhaps forms the material basis for an item of
equipment. Such facts are often thought of in terms of the conditioned
reflexes of "good" scientists or as part and parcel of the "logic" of
reasoning.
   By pursuing the notion of literary inscription, our observer has been
able to pick his way through the labyrinth. He can now explain the
objectives and products of the laboratory in his own terms, and he can
begin to understand how work is organised and why literary production
is so highly valued. He can see that both main sections (A and B) of the
laboratory are part of the same process of literary inscription. The socalled material elements of the laboratory are based upon the reified
outcomes of past controversies which are available in the published
literature. As a result, it is these same material elements which allow
papers to be written and points to be made. Furthermore, the
88                                                               LABORATORY LIFE


anthropologist feels vindicated in having retained his anthropological
perspective in the face of the beguiling charms of his informants: they
claimed merely to be scientists discovering facts; he doggedly argued
that they were writers and readers in the business of being convinced
and convincing others. Initially this had seemed a moot or even absurd
standpoint, but now it appeared far more reasonable. The problem for
participants was to persuade readers of papers (and constituent
diagrams and figures) that its statements should be accepted as fact.
To this end rats had been bled and beheaded, frogs had been flayed,
chemicals consumed, time spent, careers had been made or broken,
and inscription devices had been manufactured and accumulated
within the laboratory. This, indeed, was the very raison d'être of the
laboratory. By remaining steadfastly obstinate, our anthropological
observer resisted the temptation to be convinced by the facts. Instead,
he was able to portray laboratory activity as the organisation of
persuasion through literary inscription. Has the anthropologist himself been convincing? Has he used sufficient photographs, diagrams,
and figures to persuade his readers not to qualify his statements with
modalities, and to adopt his assertions that a laboratory is a system of
literary inscription? Unfortunately, for reasons which will later
become clear (see Chapter 6), the answer has to be no. He cannot
claim to have set forth an account which is immune from all possibility of
future qualification. Instead, the best our observer has done is to create
a small breathing space. The possibility of future réévaluation of his
statements remains. As we shall see in the next chapter, for example,
the observer can be forced back into the labyrinth as soon as questions
are posed about the historical evolution of any one specific fact.



                                     NOTES
     1. We stress that "the observer" is a fictional character so as to draw attention to
the process whereby we are engaged in constructing an account (see Chapter 1). The
essential similarity of our procedures for constructing accounts and those used by
laboratory scientists in generating and sustaining facts will become clear in the course of
our discussion. The point is taken up explicitly in Chapter 6.
     2. The notion of inscription as taken from Derrida ( 1977) designates an operation
more basic than writing (Dagognet, 1973). It is used here to summarize all traces, spots,
points, histograms, recorded numbers, spectra, peaks, and so on. See below.
     3 A file of photographs of the laboratory is presented after Chapter 2
     4. See note 2.
An Anthropologist Visits the Laboratory                                               89

      5. This notion of inscription device is sociological by nature. It allows one to
describe a whole set of occupations in the laboratory, without being disturbed by the
wide variety of their material shapes. For example, a "bioassay for TRF" counts as one
inscription device even though it takes five individuals three weeks to operate and
occupies several rooms in the laboratory Its salient feature is the final production of a
figure A large item of apparatus, such as the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
 Spectrometer, is rarely used as an inscription device It is used instead to monitor a
process of peptide production. However, the same apparatus, a scale for instance, can
be considered an inscription device when it is used to get information about a new
compound; a machine when it is used to weigh some powder; and a checking device
when used to verify that another operation has gone according to plan
      6 Our observer was well aware of the popularisation of the term due to Kuhn
( 1970) and of the subsequent debates over its ambiguity and significance for models of
scientific development (see, for example, Lakatos and Musgrave, 1970).
      7 We use the term "peptide" throughout the following argument One classical
 textbook definition of the peptidic bond is as follows: "A covalent bond between two
amino acids in which the alpha amino group of one amino acid is bonded to the alphacarboxyl group of the other with the elimination of H 2 O" (Watson, 1976) In practice,
"peptide" is a synonym for a small protein. However, it is important to realise that such
terms need not be defined as if they have a universal meaning beyond that of the specific
culture in which they are used As if they were the terms used by the tribe under study,
we shall enclose such terms in quotes in our discussion and attempt to account for them
 in nontechnical terms
      8. There are only some twenty amino acids in the body; proteins and peptides are
 made up exclusively of these amino acids; each amino acid has a name, for example,
tyrosine, tryptophene, and proline In the text we often use a simple abbreviation of
these names (which uses the three first letters of the amino acid name).
      9 These very crude figures are intended merely to give a general idea of the scale
They are based on the volume of space devoted to different topics in the Index Medicus.
     10 Once again, these divisions are extremely artificial in that they are much too
large and rigid to correspond directly to members' appraisal of their activities On the
other hand, these programmes have become very stable and routinised by comparison
with those of other laboratories Our intention here is merely to provide the reader with
the backcloth necessary for understanding subsequent chapters.
     11. The observer would be told, for example, that " w h e n a chemist shows the
spatial configuration of somatostatin is such that a particular amino acid is very exposed
on the outside of the molecular structure; it may be that by replacing or protecting it,
some new activity will be observed "
     12 It would be wrong to take differences between what is and is not technical in
science as the starting point These differences are themselves the focus of important
negotiations between members. This idea has been especially developed in sociology of
techniques by Gallon (1975). See also Chapter 1 p. 21ff and Chapter 6.
     13. The same tendency is evident in sociological discussions of science which
uncritically adopt the attitude that material phenomena are manifestations of conceptual entities
     14 During the first year of the study a new method of chromatography was tried in
the laboratory Albert worked on it for a year trying to adapt it to the purification
programme of the group. As soon as it became settled, Albert turned the instrument over
to a technician, after which it became a purely "technical" matter
90                                                                LABORATORY LIFE


     15. These calculations are only approximate: they are based on the overall budget
of the laboratory as computed from grant applications. The activation of the laboratory
cost about one million dollars. This was simply to connect the space to the rest of the
institute (Photograph 1); buying the equipment on the general market cost approximately $300,000 a year; Ph.D. holders earn an average of $25,000 a year, while for
technicians the figure is nearer $ 19,000 a year. The total wage bill tops half a million
dollars a year. The total budget of the laboratory is one and a half million dollars a year.
     16 The advantage of a well-kept publication list is that it includes every item
produced by the group, including rejected articles, unpublished lectures, abstracts, and
so on The following figures are intended to convey an idea of the scale of article
production. Of course, only a stable laboratory can provide a reliable publication list.
     17. We use the term "item" to refer to all the different types of published materials,
articles, abstracts, lectures, and so on
     18. It is interesting to note the differences between those who argue that the
development of a theory of citing behaviour should necessarily precede the use of
citation data by sociologists and those who argue that the development of a citation
typology w i l l enable the analyst to overcome technical difficulties in the use of citation
data. See, for example, Edge ( 1 9 7 6 ) and other contributions to the International
Symposium on Quantitative Methods in the History of Science, Berkeley, California,
August 25-27, 1 976. See also the special issue of Social Studies of Science 7 (2; May
1977)
     1 9. In its traditional aristotelian meaning a "modality" is "a proposition in which
the predicate is affirmed or denied of the subject with any kind of qualification" (Oxford
Dictionary). In a more modern sense, a modality is any statement about another
statement (Ducrot and Todorov, 1972). The following discussion owes much to
Greimas ( 1 9 7 6 ) and Fabbri (private communication, 1976)
    20. The notion of "object" is used here because it has a root in common with
"objectivity " Whether a given statement is objective or subjective cannot be
determined outside the context of laboratory work This work is precisely intended to
construct an object which can be said to exist beyond any subjectivity (see Chapter 4)
As Bachelard (1934) put it "science is not objective, it is projective."
    21. In semiotics, the term "deontic" is used to designate the type of modality which
indicates what "ought" to be done (Ducrot and Todorov, 1972). Although very crude,
this analysis is intended, like the rest of this chapter, to do no more than introduce the
general problem of scientific literature. More precise discussion can be found in Gopnik
(1973), Greimas (1976) and Bastide (forthcoming).
PHOTOGRAPH   FILE




                    91
This page intentionally left blank
Image Not Available




                      93
     Image Not Available




94
Image Not Available




                      95
     Image Not Available




96
Image Not Available




                      97
     Image Not Available




98
Image Not Available




                      99
      Image Not Available




1OO
Image Not Available




                      1O1
      Image Not Available




102
Image Not Available




                      1O3
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 3




THE CONSTRUCTION OF A FACT:
THE CASE OF TRF(H)




In the last chapter, we portrayed an anthropologist making his way
through the laboratory and constructing an account in his own terms of
the activity he saw. We presented the laboratory as a system of literary
inscription, an outcome of which is the occasional conviction of others
that something is a fact. Such conviction entails the perception that a
fact is something which is simply recorded in an article and that it has
neither been socially constructed nor possesses its own history of
construction. Understanding the nature of a fact in these terms would
obviously hinder any attempt to implement what has been called the
"strong programme" in the sociology of science. 1 In this chapter, we
shall attempt to examine in detail how a fact takes on a quality which
appears to place it beyond the scope of some kinds of sociological and
historical explanation. In short, what processes operate to remove the
social and historical circumstances on which the construction of a fact
depends? In order to pursue this question we confine our discussion to
a particular concrete example and to the social construction of a single
fact. In particular, we shall specify the precise time and place in the
process of fact construction when a statement became transformed
into a fact and hence freed from the circumstances of its production.
                                                                   105
106                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


   A fact only becomes such when it loses all temporal qualifications
and becomes incorporated into a large body of knowledge drawn upon
by others. Consequently, there is an essential difficulty associated
with writing the history of a fact: it has, by definition, lost all historical
reference. There is a marked difference between a contentious
statement and its subsequent (or prior) acceptance as established fact
(cf., Chapter 2). Historians of science endeavour to reveal the
intervening process of metamorphosis, usually by taking established
facts as their starting points and extrapolating backward ( for example,
Olby, 1974). However, this approach necessarily makes it difficult
fully to appreciate a situation in which there is no path. Most of the
time, historical reconstruction necessarily misses the process of
solidification and inversion whereby a statement becomes a fact (see
Chapter 4) and this is why some sociologists of science(Collins, 1975)
have suggested that it is more useful to monitor contemporary debate
than to rely on historical accounts. In spite of these basic methodological
difficulties (well known to practitioners of history of science), we shall
attempt to reconstruct certain historical events in our laboratory for
three main reasons. Firstly, we mentioned in the last chapter that the
achievements of the laboratory and the credit bestowed on its members
resulted from the characterisation of three substances (TRF, LRF,
and somatostatin). The establishment of a new laboratory in 1970 was
intended further to develop the achievements of the 1969 programme
for the study of TRF. As a result, it was hard to find a single piece of
equipment, a grant application, an aspect of behaviour or even a
feature of spatial organisation in the laboratory which did not in some
way depend on the earlier discovery of TRF. Secondly, the analysis of
the construction of TRF turned out to be of manageable size. We were
able to accumulate all articles pertaining to TRF (see below for the
definition of this corpus), to undertake fifteen interviews with major
participants, and to gain access to the archives of the two groups
engaged in the TRF(H) research effort. 2 This relatively comprehensive collection of material on one comparatively minor episode
provides the basis for a detailed analysis of the social construction of a
fact. Thirdly, we have chosen to study the historical genesis of what is
now a particularly solid fact. TRF(H) is now an object with a welldefined molecular structure, which at first sight would hardly seem
amenable to sociological analysis. If the process of social construction
can be demonstrated for a fact of such apparent solidity, we feel this
would provide a telling argument for the feasibility of the strong
programme in the sociology of science.
The Construction of a Fact                                         107


   In short, our objective in studying the genesis of TRF is simultaneously to provide a background necessary for subsequent chapters, to
explicate the influence and the main claims to credit of the laboratory,
and to provide support for the view that hard facts are thoroughly
understandable in terms of their social construction.
   In one sense, historical accounts are necessarily literary fictions
(De Certeau, 1973; Greimas, 1976; Foucault, 1966). Historians, as
portrayed in historical texts, can move freely in the past, possess
knowledge of the future, have the ability to survey settings in which
they are not (and never will be) involved, have access to actors'
motives, and (rather like god) are all-knowing and all-seeing, able to
judge what is good and bad. They can produce histories in which one
thing is the "sign" of another and in which disciplines and ideas
"burgeon," "mature," or "lie fallow." Our own historical interest in
this chapter, however, does not attempt to imitate that of professional
historians. We do not attempt to produce a precise chronology of
events in the field, nor to determine what "really happened." Nor do
we attempt an historical exposition of the development of the
speciality of "releasing factors." Instead our concern is to demonstrate how a hard fact can be sociologically deconstructed. With this
somewhat lame historical interest we hope to provide an enriched
study of the past which avoids some of the basic contradictions and
lack of symmetry characteristic of much history of science (Bloor,
 1976).

TRF(H) in Its Different Contexts
    In order to avoid jeopardising our sociological objective by falling
prey to one of the main pitfalls of historical analysis mentioned above,
it is important not to start from any knowledge of what TRF(H) "really
is." We start, therefore by specifying the way in which the meaning
and significance of TRF(H) vary according to the context of their
usage.
    If we define a network as a set of positions within which an object
such as TRF has meaning, it is clear that the facticity of an object is
relative only to a particular network or networks. One convenient way
roughly to assess the extent of a network is to ask how many people
know the meaning of the term TRF (or TRH). We are confident that it
would mean little or nothing to the majority of readers. Its expanded
form, Thyrotropin Releasing Factor (Hormone), might enable a
108                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


number of people to connect the term with things scientific. A much
smaller group could locate it in endocrinology. To a few thousand
medics, for example, TRF refers to a test of use in screening potential
malfunctions of the pituitary, although TRH itself would be otherwise
no more unusual than other medical substances. To a few thousand
endocrinologists, TRH refers to a booming subfield within their
discipline. These individuals would recognise TRF as one of a family
of recently discovered factors. It is likely that as active researchers
these endocrinologists will have read at least some of the 698
published articles (as of 1975) with TRH in the title (see Figure 2.2).
If they are physicians, they are likely to have read at least one of the
reviews and textbooks which include discussion on the substance. If
students, they will have read about TRH in textbooks:

  The most dramatic neuroendocrine discovery made during the period
  between the present and previous editions of this text was the elucidation
  of the structure of TRH, accomplished virtually simultaneously by
  means of investigators associated with the laboratories of Guillemin and
  Schally (Williams, 1974: 784).
  Some of the hypothalamic releasing and inhibitory factors, which are
  short peptides have been isolated and identified . . . . They are produced
  in only minute amounts, for example only 1 mg of the thyrotropin
  releasing factor (TRF) was obtained from several tons of hypothalamic
  tissues obtained from the slaughterhouse. Identification and synthesis of
  some of the releasing and inhibiting factors in the laboratories of R.
  Guillemin and A. V. Schally and others has been an outstanding advance
  in biochemical endocrinology (Lehninger, 1975: 810).

In spite of its "outstanding" and "dramatic" character, no more than a
few lines are devoted to the discovery in works more than 1000 pages
long. For most readers of these texts, knowledge of TRH is limited to
these few lines. However, for many researchers and graduate students,
TRH is not just a recently discovered structure. It is a substance which
can be utilised in setting up new bioassays. To look at, TRH is an
unremarkable white powder, which has either been purchased from
some large chemical firm or has been given by a colleague. The origin
of TRH samples is referred to in articles under sections entitled
"Acknowledgments" ("we thank Dr. X for making TRF available to
us") or "Materials and Methods" ("TRH was purchased from . . . .").
However, TRH also appears in articles as a well-established fact.
Reference to the origin of the concept is made, albeit with decreasing
frequency (see Figure 3.1), by means of a tail of perfunctory citations
Figure 3.1
This diagram combines two sources of information. On the left axis,
we plotted the number of citations made to the final articles published
on TRF by Schally (G.I) and by Guillemin (G.ll). It is clear that the
credit-as measured by citations-is nearly identical; it is also clear
that less and less citations were made as TRF(H) became a taken-forgranted fact. On the right axis, we plotted the number of articles with
TRF(H) in the title (see Fig. 2.2). The difference between the slopes of
the left and right curves illustrates the transformation of the fact.




                                                                   109
110                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


of one or two of a certain set of eight papers. Within this network, then,
TRH is accepted as a fact in the sense that it is sufficient to know that
"TRH regulates the release by the pituitary of TSH," that "its
chemical formula is Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH 2 " and that it can be
purchased from this or that chemical company. At least, this is
sufficient to enable the production of articles with titles such as
"Investigations concerning TRF induced hypothermia in rats" or
"The effect of synthetic TRH on transmembrane potential and
membrane resistance of adenohypophysial cells." The main force of
arguments in these articles concerns a problem other than the characterisation of TRF; TRF is used simply as a tool. For investigators, such use of a characterised substance, rather than an impure
fraction, in an assay means that one of many unknowns can be
conveniently eliminated (Chapter 5, p. 205). TRF thus acts as a tool
in these papers in the sense that it provides one less concern, or one less
source of noise, for the researcher.
   For a still smaller group, comprising a few score individuals and half
a dozen laboratories, TRH is not merely a tool. For them, TRH
represents and entire subfield. Indeed, for a few of the individuals in
our study, it represented a lifetime's achievement: TRH constituted
their professional life, the justification of their main claim to credit and
position.
   It is clear, then, that TRF can take on a different meaning and
significance depending on the particular network of individuals for
which it has relevance. Consequently, a study which focussed on a few
individuals within our laboratory is likely to amount to a study of TRF
in terms of the careers of these individuals. If a study focussed on wider
networks of groups for whom TRF constituted an analytical tool, we
would be more likely to emphasise the use of TRF as a technique.
Claims about the universality of science should not obscure the fact
that TRH exists as a "new recently discovered substance" within the
confines of networks of endocrinologists. Its treatment as a nonproblematic substance is confined to a few hundred new investigators.
Outside these networks TRH simply does not exist(see Chapter 4). In
the hands of outsiders and once devoid of its label, TRH would be
merely thought of as "some kind of white powder." It would only become TRH again through its replacement within the network of peptide chemistry where it first originated. Even a well-established fact
loses its meaning when divorced from its context.
   An additional complication is that networks differ both over space
and time, as can be demonstrated by an examination of citations
The Construction of a Fact                                          1 1 1


between TRH papers. 3 In 1970 TRH was reconstituted within a new
network. Between 1962 and 1970 a group of less than 25 people
published 64 papers dealing exclusively with the isolation of TRH,
rather than with its modes of action. After 1970, however, TRH
appeared in papers published by a much larger group of researchers.
The exact interface between the first and the second networks is
evident from the continued citing of certain of the pre-1970 papers
after the switch took place. Papers dealing with the isolation of TRH
were cited 533 times between 1962 and 1970. Between 1970 and
1975, however, they were cited 870 times but almost 80 percent of
these citations went to eight papers published between January 1969
and February 1970. The switch from one network to another is also
apparent from changes in the authorship of papers with TRH in the
title. Before January 1969 almost all authors of TRH papers were
neuroendocrinologists engaged in programmes of isolation or in
studying modes of action (see Chapter 2). Subsequently, authors came
from a variety of neighbouring disciplines. Moreover, there were more
outside authors than neuroendocrinologists. These three factors (the
number of papers published, the pattern of citations, and the disciplinary origin of authors) indicate the presence of two distinct communities of participants: insiders and outsiders. In addition, we might
suppose that the eight highly cited papers provide a clue as to how the
meaning of TRH was transformed between one community for whom it
represented a life-time's work to another for whom it was merely a
technique. How and why this switch took place are the central
questions of this chapter.
   Even within the network of individuals for whom TRH represented a
life-time's work, the precise meaning of the term differed. In the first of
the two excerpts from textbooks quoted above it is said that the
structure was "accomplished virtually simultaneously by R. Guillemin
and A. V. Schally." More strikingly, the second excerpt refers to TRF
whereas the first uses the term TRH. We ourselves have used the two
terms interchangeably in our discussion so far. In fact, these alternative formulations corresponded directly to those used in each of the
groups led by Guillemin and Schally. It became apparent to us that
these terms were different names for the same thing by virtue of
comments made by members of the laboratory which we studied: what
was "actually TRF" was said to have been wrongly referred to
elsewhere as TRH. Furthermore, it was argued, credit for the
discovery of the substance had been wrongly appropriated by the other
112                                               LABORATORY LIFE

group and that what they had identified as a hormone (H) was really a
factor (F). 4 Nor did either group agree with the pronouncement that the
discovery had been made simultaneously. Instead, each claimed that
the other had made the discovery later than themselves and had
received credit by virtue of deliberate ambiguities in their accounts of
the investigations.5
   In spite of this controversy between proponents of TRH and TRF,
members of a wider network did not heavily favour one or other
version. In terms of citations, received credit was evenly divided
between the groups, partly because outsiders were not willing to
become involved in the dispute, partly because they did not know
about it (see Fig. 3.1) and partly because these outsiders were in any
case more interested in TRF(H) as a tool than as a contentious
scientific achievement. But the mere suggestion that credit had been
equally distributed served further to enrage the disputing parties. A
member of Schally 's group, for example, complained that Guillemin's
group had "succeeded in getting half the credit even though they had
got there last." A member of Guillemin's group similarly commented
that their opponents had obtained half the credit without having done
anything. The gradual decrease in citations suggests that it became
less and less an issue for the community as a whole as to who actually
made the discovery and who should be cited for it. For insiders,
however, some bitterness was apparent as much as seven years later.
In response to our sociological enquiries (which undoubtedly had the
effect of rekindling the dormant conflict) members of each group
carefully set out to compare publication and submission dates so as to
establish the "correct" and "definitive" allocation of priority.

The Delineation of a Subspecialty:
The Isolation and Characterisation of TRF(H)
  We have thus far identified a group of insiders before the end of
1969, and a larger group of outsiders after the end of 1969. The
transition from one to another centred around eight papers published
in 1969, which were thought to have solved the central research
problem. In a similar way, almost all the papers written by insiders
before the end of 1969 include references to a few papers published
around 1962. Reference to these 1962 papers frequently mention the
words "first," "recently shown," "accumulated results," and so on. It
is thus possible that developments in 1962 provided a focus for
subsequent research in a similar way to the transition that occurred in
The Construction of a Fact                                              113


1969. On both occasions, a particular cluster of papers provided a
starting point. After 1962, a number of papers whose concern was to
prove the existence of a principle regulating TSH secretion were no
longer cited. Instead, references to a smaller cluster of review papers
delineated the beginning of new problem. A typical reference to the
principle established before 1962, together with a statement of the
subsequent problem, is given in the following excerpt:

  Despite accumulated information [9 citations] and almost universal
  agreement that the brain must play an important role in the regulation of
  thyrotropin (TSH) secretion, the nature and extent of this role have not
  been established (Bogdanove, 1962: 622).

None of the nine authors cited in this excerpt participated in the new
subspeciality. Prior to the first transition point, research concerned a
substance which was universally postulated but the structure of which
was unknown. After the second transition point, the nature of the
substance was universally accepted but its role and physiological
relevance had become problematic. The outcome of research conducted before 1962 could be summarised as "the brain controls TSH
secretion." Similarly, the outcome of research conducted before the
end of 1969 could be summarised as "TRF(H) is Pyro-Glu-His-ProNH 2 ."
   It would of course be possible to delve further into the past in order
to determine when and why the inital statement was made about the
control of TSH by the brain. For two reasons, however, further
retracing would not be useful. Firstly, the statement about TSH was
taken after 1962 as a nonproblematic fact and subsequent research
into TRF(H) entailed fact production reliant only on the nonproblematic character of the earlier statement. Researchers entering the
field of TRF(H) after 1962 could thus rely on Bogdanove's ( 1 9 6 2 )
review as sufficient baseline information. Secondly, in order to
achieve an understanding of the construction of facts, it is necessary to
focus on one specific episode rather than on longer periods. The study
of longer periods would necessitate our accepting a larger number of
facts without examining their construction.
   We constructed a file of all articles published between 1962 and
1969 which deal exclusively with the isolation of TRF(H). This file
was initially built up from lists of articles in the two laboratories which
worked on TRF(H) and from citations in these articles. The file was
114                                                 LABORATORY LI FE


checked against Index Medicus and double-checked with the Science
Citation Index (SCI) Permuterm, as a result of which review articles
were added. In total, four groups have worked on the isolation of TRF:
Two groups, led by Schibuzawa in Japan and by Schreiber in
Hungary, left the field after a while for reasons which will later become
clear; Schally's group took up TRF(H) research in 1963; only
Guillemin's group maintained research activity throughout the period
1962-1969. A few other authors wrote reviews but did not participate
in the citation network (in other words, although they cited other
papers, they were not themselves cited). Articles dealing with mode of
action of TRF(H), rather than its isolation, were excluded.
  Figure 3.2 is a schematic representation of the growth of TRF(H)
subspecialty between 1962 and 1969 (inclusive). The vertical axis
represents time and the horizontal axis represents the cumulative
number of papers cited by TRF(H) papers. Thus, each published
paper is plotted on the diagram according to (a) its date of publication
(b) the number of new 'citations it made over and above those
previously made by earlier papers. For a specialty whose papers
continually cited the same body of material, we would expect a more
vertical growth curve. Two features of growth are apparent from the
curve for TRF(H). Firstly, there was an increased rate of publication
during two phases of development; during 1965 and during 1969.
Secondly, at several points, papers were published which drew heavily
upon a fresh body of cited material. These points, represented on the
curve by "kicks" to the left (and labelled with arrows in the diagram),
occurred in 1962, 1965, 1966, and 1968. As we shall see later, the
shape of this curve matches the recollections of informants as
expressed through interviews. For example, the sudden increase in
newly cited material in 1966 corresponds to the entry into the field by
Schally's group. By contrast, the sections of the curve which are
almost vertical correspond to what respondents referred to as depressive and nonproductive periods.

A Choice of Strategies
   Clearly, there are disadvantages in relying solely on the description
of an area delineated in terms of publications and citations. In
particular, it is all too easy when thinking of a research area in these
terms to think of its boundaries as objectively independent of participants. To counter this effect we shall use additional material to show
how the area may well have developed in a different direction.
Figure 3.2
This is a schematic representation of the growth of the TRF specialty.
Each point represents one paper; the horizontal axis represents the
cumulative number of papers cited by these papers; the vertical axis
represents time. The upper limit (top left hand corner) corresponds to
the end of the controversy about the existence of TRF; the lower limit
(bottom right hand comer) correspondes to the end of the controversy about what TRF is. The number of papers, the distance of each
paper from the preceding one-both in terms of time and number of
newly cited material-provides a general pattern which is strikingly
different between one area and another. The general shape of the
diagram illustrates the importance of imported papers (see Fig. 3.4)
and of citing papers from other areas. In this representation, each
paper is related to all the papers it cites and all the papers it is cited by.
The general map-impossible to retrace here-gives an approximation of the field and of all the operations which are performed in it.
                                                                          115
116                                                   LABORATORY LIFE

   By 1962, a number of hormones other than TRF(H) had been
discovered (Meites et al., 1975; Donovan et al., forthcoming). Indeed,
after the war endocrinology had been completely transformed by the
determination of the amino acid constituents and sequences of several
hormones (such as insulin, oxytocin and vasopressin). Thus, the
anticipation that a sequence could be found for TRF was not new.
However, the pursuit of this sequence entailed difficult and risky
decisions. In order to appreciate that the TRF( H) research programme
was based on decisions about an uncertain future, rather than on
logical deductions from past events, it is necessary to examine the
alternative courses of action which were then possible. Firstly, no
other hypothalamic factors had been characterized by 1962. The
analogy with hormones successfully discovered remained very much
an analogy, as the use of the term factor indicates (Harris, 1972).
Although physiological investigations of hypothalamic factors were
making solid advances, almost no progress had been made in chemical
investigations. According to the majority of participants, the number
of unsubstantiated claims prevalent at this time was overwhelming.
Their frustration was made explicit in many papers of the period:

  The young field of hypothalamic pituitary physiology is already littered
  with dead and dying hypotheses. I probably add to the casualties by
  presenting another premature proposal (Bogdanove, 1962: 626).
     The oddity of the situation with respect to the hypothalamic
  substances is that never before to my knowledge, except for the monster
  of Loch Ness and the Abominable Snowman of the Himalayas has the
  existence of hypothetical objects been indicated by so much imposing
  circumstantial evidence (Greep, 1963: 5 1 1 ) .

An eminent pharmacologist commented similarly: "the only thing I
can believe in this field are the retractions" (Guillemin, 1975). By
1962, work on the first postulated factor (CRF, see Chapter 2) was at
the same stage it had been for the previous ten years and was to reamin
thus for the next fifteen years. A host of factors had been postulated
which remained unconfirmed in 1976 and artefacts abounded (Chapter 4). Virtually any consistent effect was given a name and a few
preliminary steps of purification from the soup of brain extracts were
considered sufficient to merit the writing of a paper. Frequently, the
effect was regarded as sufficiently consistent to merit writing a paper
on aspects of rat behaviour, calcium levels, or thermoregulation.
The Construction of a Fact                                                 117


   Secondly, the decision to begin research on TRF(H) entailed the
postulation both of the existence of new discrete factors and that these
factors were peptides. Although, at the time, the notion that the brain
regulated the pituitary was a prerequisite to being a neuroendocrinologist, it was also possible to hold that known factors like
oxytocin and vasopressin could account for such regulation. For
instance, as late as 1969, one of Guillemin's papers was rejected by
Science simply because "it was well known that vasopressin releases
TSH in vitro and in vivo." Another investigator, McCann, was not
interested in TRF, which he regarded as an artefact, the effect of which
could be explained by recourse to a known substance (Donovan et al., in
press). Sticking to the idea that there was a new factor entailed a
further assumption that the factor was a peptide, because this was the
only way that available chemistry could be utilised in the releasing
factor field. So the postulation was dual. The substance had to be new,
but the chemistry of this new object had to be classical and was
imported from outside fields after appropriate modifications. We shall
return to this point later.
   Thirdly, the strategy of isolating and characterizing substances,
although already well established by Du Vigneaud's achievement with
vasopressin and oxytocin, was slightly at odds with the physiological
training of neuroendocrinologists. For example, although Harris,
Scharrer, McCann, and Guillemin were all expert at setting up
sophisticated bioassays, at growing cell cultures, and at preparing
anatomical slides, they were largely ignorant of chemistry. Chemistry
was "ancilla physiologicae" to them. If Harris and McCann accepted
the idea of undertaking some isolation work, they never accepted the
relegation of physiology to a discipline subservient to the goals and
practices of chemists (Harris, 1972). One of their arguments concerned their distaste for teaching duties and the extreme dullness of
routine chemistry.

  When you have students you cannot ask them to cut brains all the time:
  you have to give them interesting things to do: you cannot corner them in
  routine tasks, which will pay off only in five or six years. If they come to
  your laboratory in order to graduate, they expect to write a few papers, it
  has to be interesting (McCann, 1976).

  The decision to obtain the structure of TRF(H) also entailed
considerable expense, because if these peptides existed at all, they
118                                                        LABORATORY LIFE


could only be found in minute quantities (thousands of times smaller
than the hormones which had been characterized by Du Vigneaud).
The gathering and treatment of millions of hypothalami was a collossal
task. As Schally put it:

  People became suspicious . . . they were used to high yield peptides like
  the others [oxytocin] . . . and they could not understand why we didn't
  get the structure . . . It was not fair of them, we had to create a whole
  technology . . . . Nobody before had to process millions of hypothalami
  . . . The key factor is not the money, it's the will . . . the brutal force of
  putting in 60 hours a week for a year to get one million fragments
  (Schally, 1976).

  An idea of the resistance to this programme can be gained by
comparing the strategy adopted by Guillemin with that of Harris, who
was one of the founders of the field. Even after he had hired one
chemist whose sole task was to isolate LRF, Harris maintained a slow
and cumbersome assay on conscious rabbits which prevented the
chemist from screening more than five or eight fractions a month. If the
chemist had been allowed to work at his natural speed, he would have
produced far more fractions than the physiologist could possibly have
coped with. Usually, however, the chemist had to give way; the
physiologist maintained his assay which he perceived as more interesting. Of course, as one of Harris's former colleagues commented:

   [H]e wanted that isolation done . . . but he didn't devote very much of
   his overall effort to help isolating these factors . . . being basically a
   neuroanatomist. . . . I was able to convince him to have hypothalami
   shipped from the US . . . we went that far . . . he could not guess that we
   would need 100 times that amount (Anonymous, 1976a).

Schally's strategy was completely different:

   I am not interested in Physiology. . . . I want to help physicians,
   clinicians . . . and the only way is to extract these compounds, isolate
   them and provide clinicians with enormous quantities of them . . . like
   vitamin C. Somebody had to have the guts . . . now we have tons of
   it. ...
      That's why I chose extraction . . . there is no choice. It's like fighting
   Hitler. You have to cut him down. It's not a choice. The strategy was
   good and was the only one (Schally, 1976).
The Construction of a Fact                                                 119

   The decision to redefine the TRF subspecialty solely in terms of
determining the structure of the substance completely reshaped the
professional practice of the subfield, even though this was entirely in
line with the central concepts of endocrinology as a whole. Precisely
because of the consistency of Guillemin's strategy with the objectives
of endocrinology, his decision did not constitute an intellectual
revolution.
   Because of the success of his strategy, there is a tendency to think of
Guillemin's decision as having been the only correct one to make. But
the decision to reshape the field was not logically necessary. Even if
the decision to pursue the structure of TRF(H) had not been taken, a
subfield of releasing factors would still exist. Of course, only crude or
partially purified extracts in short supply would be used, but all the
problems of physiology could nonetheless be studied, if not resolved. It
should also be realised that until 1969 there was no indication that the
strategies adopted by Guillemin and Schally were successful. Indeed,
everything that occurred before 1969 suggested that it was folly to
reshape the specialty in 1962. Similarly, it was thought that Guillemin
would have been better off to wait for a drastic amelioration in peptide
analysis which would have then made possible the solution of the TRF
problem by the use of picogram quantities at a much lower cost
(Anonymous, 1976b).

The Elimination of Concurrent Efforts by New Investments
   It is probably no coincidence that the two researchers (Guillemin
and Schally) who dared to plunge themselves into the task of reshaping
the field were both immigrants. Schally's testimony is particularly
suggestive of the importance of their initially peripheral position. For
example, he made the following remarks about a third party:

  He is the Establishment . . . he never had to do anything . . . everything
  was given to him . . . of course, he missed the boat, he never dared
  putting in what was required: brute force. Guillemin and I, we are
  immigrants, obscure little doctors, we fought our way to the top; that's
  what I like about Guillemin; at least we fought, and [with a gesture of his
  hand towards framed awards on the wall] now we have more awards than
  all of them (Schally, 1976).

  The present case appears to fit fairly well with what is known about
the formation of specialties. The enormity of the research task tended
120                                                       LABORATORY LIFE


only to attract people who were not in a position to satisfy themselves
with physiology, and who were not prepared for a conceptual
revolution. They occupied a niche which entailed a break with existing
methods and an immense amount of hard, dull, costly, and repetitive
work: the kind of niche from which people normally shun away.
   The enormity of the research task and the nature of the decision
explain why more people did not take up this work. This is also
consistent with the fate of investigators who dropped the question after
making some initial contributions. One reviewer, for example, drew
attention to the "misguided work" done by Schibuzawa and Schreiber
as follows:

  Schibuzawa and his colleagues have been studying a polypeptide which
  they can extract from the hypothalamus and posterior pituitary lobe
  . . . . They call it TRF (thyrotropin releasing factor) and believe it to be
  the neurohumor. . . . Their findings have not been confirmed so far
  (Bogdanove, 1962: 623).

Schibuzawa apparently made the same choices as Guillemin. He
claimed to have isolated TRF and even presented an amino acid
composition for his peptide. But instead of being acclaimed as having
solved the problem of TRF in two years, his work was surrounded by
questions. His papers were criticised word by word and his fractions
were said not to display any activity in laboratories other than his own.
According to one account, he did not turn up when invited to repeat his
experiments at one laboratory. In terms of our discussion in Chapter 2,
the operations on his papers took the form of doubt and deprecation.
He wrote no new papers after 1962, his claim to have solved the TRF
problem was dissolved, and his substance became regarded as an
artefact. Subsequently, he left research altogether. It is important to
note that despite Schibuzawa's inability to prove his claims at the time,
they were proved (with the exception of the amino acid composition)
ten years later. This was not so much because of his failure but rather
because in the meantime the definition of a proof had drastically
changed.
   Schibuzawa's claims were unacceptable because somebody else
entered the field, redefined the subspecialty in terms of a new set of
rules, had decided to obtain the structure at all costs, and had been
prepared to devote the energy of "a steam roller" to its solution. For
Schibuzawa it had had been sufficient to draw upon the existing stock
The Construction of a Fact                                                 121


of accumulated knowledge and to touch upon questions of isolation
while essentially remaining within classical physiology.

   This was what you could call "normal science" . . . Thus, everybody
   knowing the field could make deductions as to what TRF was . . . their
   conclusions were correct, but it took ten years to prove it. . . . To this
   day, I don't believe they had ever seen what they talked about. They,
   Schibuzawa and Schreiber both wrote one too many papers giving the
   amino acid compositions. Now here, there is no logical assumption.
   There is no way you can postulate the amino acid composition of an
   unknown substance ( G u i l l e m i n , 1975).

In other words, there was no easy shortcut between what was already
known and the problem of sequence. Since Guillemin wanted to
determine the sequence of TRF, and since he was ready to reshape the
subfield around this crucial goal, new standards were set as to what
could and could not be judged reliable. Data, assays, methods, and
claims which might have been acceptable in relation to other goals,
were no longer accepted. Whereas Schibuzawa's papers might previously have been accepted as valid, they were subsequently regarded
as wrong. That is to say the epistemological qualities of validity or
wrongness cannot be separated from sociological notions of decisionmaking.
   The sudden change in the criteria of acceptability was made explicit
in a long review paper published in French (Guillemin, 1963). This
review specified fourteen criteria which had to be met before the
existence of a new releasing factor could be accepted. These criteria
were so stringent that only a few signals could be distinguished from
the background noise. This, in turn, meant that most previous releasing
factor literature had to be dismissed (Latour and Fabbri, 1977).

   These rigorous criteria contribute to take away any meaning from a great
   number of publications which hastily concluded that this or that
   substance acts only through the stimulation of the secretion of a
   pituitary hormone, or even that this or that protocol fits this explanation
   alone (Guillemin, 1963: 14).

  In one important sense, then, TRF did not exist prior to the
imposition of limitations, because such limitations preceded the first
experiments and defined what could be accepted in advance. In his
paper, Guillemin argued that prior to that time, the field had been
122                                                       LABORATORY LIFE


characterised by artefacts, unfounded claims, and elegant hypotheses
rather than by facts. On the basis of this reconstitution of the past in
terms of artefacts, Guillemin proposed criteria each of which was
designed to eliminate a priori any future possibility of an artefact, or,
at least, any possiblity of an artefact within the new context.
   The acceptance of these criteria demanded the expense of investing
in equipment which would meet the necessary stringency. Consequently, each of the criteria specified in the review article was
responsible for the import into the laboratory of items of equipment
necessary for constructing TRF.

  The physiological validation of a substance of hypothalamic origin as
  being a hypophysiotropic mediator, is thus a considerable enterprise; it
  requires multiple and sometimes complex techniques in neurophysiology
  . . . in biochemistry to fulfil all the above conditions before asserting that
  this hypothamalic substance or fraction, is a hypophysiotropic mediator
  (Guillemin, 1963: 14).

The same source also points out the difficulty of meeting the criteria
and the cost of the corresponding investment.

  Such a project can be undertaken only by a group, a team in which
  everyone has different but complementary skills for the central idea
  around which the team has been conceived and realized. This is
  certainly the necessary characteristic of this new orientation of Phys-
  iology, that is Neuroendocrinology (Guillemin, 1963: 11).

  The consequence of this new investment was immediately reflected
by Harris's strategy. The rules of the game, as defined by Guillemin,
became so stringent that one of Harris's chemists gave up this line of
research

  . . . [B]ecause I knew what we were competing against in this country
  [USA] in terms of money, scale of work . . . and there were no ways we
  could achieve parity, if you like, in England at that time (Anonymous,
  1976a).

  The requirements imposed by the new strategy were noted in
subsequent articles which contain assessments of work by Schibuzawa
or Schreiber. These assessments consisted largely of qualifications
which had the effect of discrediting earlier contributions. Such phrases
The Construction of a Fact                                                   123


as "gratuitous affirmation," "assays not specific enough anymore,"
"not really demonstrated," and "unreliable" are common. By contrast, Guillemin's group's first( 1962) paper was widely acclaimed(for
example, it was said to be the "first uncontrovertible evidence") and
was similarly received in subsequent years. None of the 90 citations to
this paper(as listed in the SCI between 1963 and 1969) were negative
(Latour, 1976).
   The results o f the fresh accumulation of constraints was to put
Schreiber out of the race. By increasing the material and intellectual
requirements, the number of competitors was reduced. According to
one of his colleagues, Schreiber withdrew for various material and
strategical reasons.

   His acid phosphatase test was not r e a l l y good: it was heavily criticised
   . . . he was wrong on the amino acid composition . . . he had coherent
   ideas about the subject and was running proper experiments but at that
   time it was very difficult to get hypothalami . . . he had to do it himself;
   no one realised that you need not 200 of them, but 20,000 of them . . . he
   then realised he simply could not compete . . . also you could not obtain
   radioactive iodine of high specificity, we had to wait half a year to have it
   from England, so he could not do the assays . . . it does not make sense
   to spend time on a field when you cannot compete (Anonymous, 1976b).

The same informant also provided a more ideological explanation for
Schreiber's withdrawal:

  After the communist takeover in Prague, Endocrinology was not well in
  favour . . . at that time the connection between the nervous system and
  endocrine system was not very clear-the feedback theory, at this time
  triumphant, they did not accept because it was a self contained
  system . . . that is the reason why I did not go into Endocrinology . . .
  the whole m i l i e u was antagonistic to endocrinological research . . .
  There was a span of 5 or 7 years before we could work again, and not
  only conditioned reflexes (Anonymous, 1976b).

This provides an example of the perceived influence of macrosociological factors on the field, rather than that of multiple fine social
determinations with which we have so far been mainly concerned. It is
worth noting, however, that this statement provoked dismissive
comments from other participants. Guillemin, for example, felt that
such statements of ideological influence were mere rationalisations of
the real fact that Schreiber had "missed the boat."
124                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


   The decision drastically to change the rules of the subfield appears
to have involved the kind of asceticism associated with strategies of not
spending a penny before accumulating a million. There was this kind of
asceticism in the decisions to resist simplifying the research question,
to accumulate a new technology, to start bioassays from scratch, and
firmly to reject any previous claims. In the main, the constraints on
what was acceptable were determined by the imperatives of the
research goals, that is, obtain the structure at any cost. Previously, it
had been possible to embark on physiological research with a
semipurified fraction because the research objective was to obtain the
physiological effect. When attempting to determine the structure,
however, researchers needed absolutely to rely on the accuracy of
their bioassays.
   The new constraints on work were thus defined both by the new
research goal and by the means through which structures could be
determined. As a result of these constraints, we have seen that
researchers such as Schibuzawa, Schreiber, and Harris were excluded.
But for the support of funding agencies, Guillemin might himself have
remained a mere critic of others' work. But Guillemin's past achievements provided some guarantee that he could carry out research on the
basis of the new constraints. 6 Even so, no one expected in 1962 that the
determination of structure would take eight years, millions of hypothalami and more asceticism than anyone could have guessed.

The Construction of a New Object
   We started by identifying the different networks in which TRF had
meaning and by surveying the area in which it was created. We then
discussed how a point of transition opened up the TRF area and how a
new research imperative, "obtain the structure at all costs," subordinated the role of physiology relative to chemistry. This new strategy had
the effect of both raising the cost of the programme and increasing the
stringency of the rules. It was acknowledged as commendable by
neuroendocrinologists as a whole and funded by U.S. agencies.
However, the new strategy effectively eliminated competition from
Japan, Czechoslovakia, and England. We can now turn our attention
to the TRF area itself.
   Guillemin's initial decision was to determine the structure of any
one releasing factor. The specific choice of TRF, was in fact, due to a
variety of reasons. After the long failure of work on CRF, Guillemin's
The Construction of a Fact                                                              125


group became interested in LRF because of McCann's new assay.
Guillemin also decided to set up a new assay based on the principle of
the McKenzie assay, a classical test for measuring TSH, because a
technician who had previously worked on TSH, came to the laboratory.

  I was not sure how much of Schibuzawa and Schreiber should be
  accepted, so I didn't want to put too much of my time into TRF . . .
  within six months the assay worked relatively well ( G u i l l e m i n , 1976).

At first these research efforts constituted a secondary programme:
"Then, it became obvious to me that we could look at TRF"
(Guillemin, 1976). However, this was not done to check Schreiber's
claims.

   No, I neglected those, and it was not to check them, if you start checking
   that sort of thing you never do anything; the idea was to start a
   completely de novo bioassay for TRF ( G u i l l e m i n , 1976).

But this kind of assay was widely available at that time:

   To this day I don't understand how Schreiber could use this ludicrous
   assay, w h i l e anybody could have done what we did in 1 96 1 and set up a
   true assay for TRF . . . it was simple, e v e r y t h i n g was a v a i l a b l e . . .
   classical endocrinology ( G u i l l e m i n , 1976)

A new object of study thus came about within a period of normal
science as a result of the facilities of classical endocrinology, together
with the benefit of one technician's expertise and the raising of
requirements due to Guillemin's strategical decision. The new object
took its initial existence w i t h i n a local context but soon attracted a
great deal of outside attention. However, it is crucial not to use
hindsight to define this new object; it was not the TRF of 1 963, 1 966,
1 969, or 1 975. From a strictly ethnographic point of view, the object
i n i t i a l l y comprised the superimposition of two peaks after several
trials. In other words, the object was constructed out of the difference
between peaks on two curves. Let us try to clarify this point by
o u t l i n i n g the process whereby a new object begins to be constructed.
     I n i t i a l l y , a curve produced by a bioassay is taken as a baseline
against which variations can be contrasted. Subsequently, an "elution
curve" is produced by a bioassay on a purified fraction (see Chapter
2 ). After each purified fraction has been tested for bioactivity, the two
1 26                                                LABORATORY LIFE


curves are superimposed. If there is a discernible discrepancy between
the control curve and that for the purified fraction, the fraction may
then be referred to as a "fraction with TRF-like activity." As we have
seen, however, these kinds of claims about the presence of substances
and activities are common. Frequently, discrepancies between curves
are subsequently shown to have arisen as a result of background noise
in the bioassays, at which point the bioassays are denounced as
insufficiently stable and the claim to have found a fraction is dissolved.
However, when the same fraction is seen to give rise to the same
activity, the initial claim begins to be taken more seriously. In other
words, criteria of repetition and similarity are sufficient to begin to
substantiate the initial claim. Consequently, the fraction is referred to
as an entity with some consistent qualities and the initial label (TRF)
begins to stick. Even so, practitioners are wary of categorical
statements that the substance actually is TRF.
    The steady activity constituted by repeated bioassays might have
been caused by a well-known substance such as oxytocin. The
application of the constraints outlined above then enables a distinction
 to be made between the new substance and any other known activity. In
brief, these constraints require a signal unlike any other expected
signal to be discerned from the background noise. If such a distinction
is identified, the substance is taken as both stable, distinct, and new.
    Despite the fact that this process was not novel, its use in
 Guillemin's laboratory resulted in a new object (fraction with TRF-like
activity) which neither dissolved between one trial and another, nor
between one purification step and another. In addition, this object
(unlike Schibuzawa's and Schreiber's fractions) did not become the
focus of controversy. The multiple precautions taken through statistical analysis, the reputation of the laboratory, and use of assays (for
MSH, oxytocin, vasopressin, LRF, CRF, and ACTH) all countered
any possible objections which could be made by colleagues.
    Although the repeated overlapping of two peaks in 1962 was taken
to indicate the presence of a new discrete entity, it was not claimed that
they had found a substance. This was because the amino acid
composition and sequence of the entity had not then been obtained. It
was still possible that a corresponding substance might never be
obtained, as had been the case with CRF. Even if a sequence was
subsequently found, the substance could still turn out to be an artefact,
as might still be the case with TRF itself (see Chapter 4). We thus need
to stress the importance of not "reifying" the process by which a
The Construction of a Fact                                           127


substance is constructed. An object can be said to exist solely in terms
of the difference between two inscriptions. In other words, an object is
simply a signal distinct from the background of the field and the noise
of the instruments. Most importantly, the extraction of the signal and
the recognition of its distinctiveness themselves depended on the
costly and cumbersome procedure for obtaining a steady baseline.
This, in turn, was made possible by laboratory routine and by the iron
hand of the scientist who organised laboratory work and took all
precautions available within the laboratory context. Once again, to
say that TRF is constructed is not to deny its solidity as a fact. Rather,
it is to emphasise how, where, and why it was created.
   The list of technical papers published by Guillemin's group between
1962 and 1966 gives an indication of the context within which TRF
was constituted as a stable object.7 Firstly, the majority of technical
citations were made by TRF articles to other TRF articles. This
indicates the internal response of the subspecialty to the new set of
constraints imposed by Guillemin's strategy. Secondly, articles published in the first years of the subspecialty were predominantly cited.
These early papers thus appear to have formed the technical basis of
future operations. Thirdly, several techniques were borrowed from
other projects current in the group (for example, assays for LRF and
CRF). Fourthly, a number of techniques were imported from neighbouring fields. This external borrowing occurred at crucial points in
the development of the TRF field. Citations are made to techniques,
statistics, and enzymology in 1962; and mostly to biochemistry in
1966 and 1968. We can thus see, on the one hand, that the
construction of TRF depended on author's provision of inscriptions
obtained from instruments accumulated within the laboratory. At the
same time, the solidity of this object, which prevented it from
becoming subjective or artefactual, was constituted by the steady
accumulation of techniques.
   Before 1966, TRF articles were primarily concerned with the
arrangement of instruments and with improving purification processes.
These predominantly technical concerns necessarily presupposd the
existence of TRF and hence made possible the further purification of a
fraction. By 1966, an almost pure material had been obtained, which
was then subjected to the analytical tools of Chemistry. (Although an
amino acid composition of the material had already been obtained in
1965, it was not then generally regarded as correct.) However, after
this rapid advance, the programme was pulled up by an unexpected
practical problem:
1 28                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


   Perhaps the most obvious comment suggested by the results reported
   here relates to the large number of brain fragments (hypothalamus) that
   were necessary for purification of a small quantity of the hypothalamic
   neurohumor. Obviously, a much larger number of brains will be
   necessary to provide enough of the polypeptide to approach its amino
   acid sequence. . . Thus the problem of availability of large quantities of
   hypothalamic fragments collected in adequate conditions . . . remains
   the absolute prerequisite for a meaningful programme on isolation
   (Guillemin et al., 1965: 1136).

This situation was particular to the field of releasing factors. For
endocrinology as a whole, sufficient quantities of hormones had
always been available. However, attempts to obtain the structure of
releasing factors were constrained by difficulties in obtaining sufficient
quantities of hypothalamus.
   From the perspective of 1966, it remained perfectly possible that
the programme would be subsequently phased out. It was then feasible
that partially purified fractions would be continued to be used in the
study of modes of action, that localization and classical physiology
could have continued, and that Guillemin would merely have lost a few
years in working up a blind alley (Anonymous, 1976b). TRF would
have attained a status similar to GRF or CRF, each of which refers to
some activity in the bioassay, the precise chemical structure of which
had not yet been constructed.
   One important feature of our discussion so far is worth noting at this
point. We have attempted to avoid using terms which would change the
nature of the issues under discussion. Thus, in emphasising the process
whereby substances are constructed, we have tried to avoid descriptions of the bioassays which take as unproblematic relationships
between signs and things signified. Despite the fact that our scientists
held the belief that the inscriptions could be representations or
indicators of some entity with an independent existence "out there,"
we have argued that such entities were constituted solely through the
use of these inscriptions. It is not simply that differences between
curves indicate the presence of a substance; rather the substance is
identical with perceived differences between curves. In order to stress
this point, we have eschewed the use of expressions such as "the
substance was discovered by using a bioassay" or "the object was
found as a result of identifying differences between two peaks." To
employ such expressions would be to convey the misleading impression
that the presence of certain objects was a pregiven and that such
The Construction of a Fact                                                  129


objects merely awaited the timely revelation of their existence by
scientists. By contrast, we do not conceive of scientists using various
strategies as pulling back the curtain on pregiven, but hitherto
concealed, truths. Rather, objects (in this case, substances) are
constituted through the artful creativity of scientists. Interestingly,
attempts to avoid the use of terminology which implies the preexistence
of objects subsequently revealed by scientists has led us into certain
stylistic difficulties. This, we suggest, is precisely because of the
prevalence of a certain form of discourse in descriptions of scientific
process. We have therefore found it extremely difficult to formulate
descriptions of scientific activity which do not yield to the misleading
impression that science is about discovery (rather than creativity and
construction). It is not just that a change of emphasis is required;
rather, the formulations which characterise historical descriptions of
scientific practice require exorcism before the nature of this practice
can be best understood. 8

The Peptidic Nature of TRF
   1966 marked the end of a period of hard but successful work and the
beginning of three years' frustration. A basic assumption which had
thus far guided the choice of procedures and the use of analytical tools
was that TRF was a peptide. This assumption was taken as noncontroversial at the initial stages of the specialty. However, the peptidic
nature of the substance was a contextual definition. In particular, this
definition could be reaffirmed by the resistance of a fraction to a long
series of trials involving the use of several enzymes. The substance was
deemed to be a peptide if its activity was destroyed during the course of
these trials. For example, one paper written in 1963 had confirmed the
peptidic nature of the material after a first set of such trials:

   In this note we show arguments in favour of the peptidic nature of these
   substances; their biological activity is destroyed partially or totally, by
   pepsic or trypsic digestion and by heating in presence of hydrochloric
   acid (Jutisz et al., 1966: 235).

In addition, past experience had led participants to anticipate an
increase in the ratio of amino acid as a purer and purer fraction of the
peptide was obtained. In 1964, however, this increase had failed to
materialize. Moreover, a new set of enzymatic tests had failed to
130                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


destroy the activity of the fractions. The conclusiveness of the tests
depended both on the number of enzymes used and on how well their
action was characterized. By 1966, the list of enzymes used in the test
had grown extensive but none could destroy activity in the required
way. It was logical to conclude that the substance was not a peptide. In
fact, one enzyme added to the list a few years later did succeed in
destroying the activity of the fraction. By this time, however, the
substance had already been "proved" to be a peptide. This thus
demonstrates that proof and the reaching of logical conclusions
depend entirely on context, in this case on the availability of certain
enzymes.
   In papers published in May 1966, Guillemin's group drew the
logical conclusion from the negative results:

  These results are compatible with the hypothesis that TRF might not be
  a simple polypeptide as hitherto thought (Burgus et al., 1966: 2645).
   We have been led to question the long held hypothesis that TRF and
  LRF are of peptidic nature (Guillemin et al., 1966: 2279).

   Participants found only an extremely small percentage of amino
acids in their purest sample. The possibility thus arose that a large
component of TRF was of a completely different chemical nature. It
followed that the appropriate equipment and procedures for its study
might be different. The meaning of TRF thus changed. Consequently,
it was likely that the chemistry which was borrowed to study the substance would be modified and that there would be some significant
effects on the organisation of the specialty.
   The new hypothesis, that TRF comprised a small peptidic component and a large nonpeptidic component, was confirmed as a result
of work by Schally, who was a newcomer to this problem. Schally had
been a former postdoctoral fellow in Guillemin's laboratory. He
provided a vivid contrast to Guillemin's cautious, positivist approach.
Whereas Guillemin had talked mainly in terms of methods, Schally
talked about strategy. He portrayed his attempts to collect vast
quantities of hypothalami in terms of his use of "guts and brute force."
He claimed that Napoleon's campaigns provided the inspiration for his
scientific method, and he talked of the TRF specialty in terms of a
"battle field" strewn with the corpses of competitors. "He is a
dynamo," commented another participant. He was able directly to
supervise the purification part of the TRF programme because of his
training in chemistry, and relied on a physiologist for the operation of
The Construction of a Fact                                          131


the bioassay. By contrast, Guillemin was a physiologist by training
who had to rely on someone else for precise chemical work. Neither of
them liked having to rely completely on someone else's expertise, but
this necessity was dictated by their perception of the problem.
   By the time Schally published on TRF in 1966, Schreiber had
already withdrawn and Guillemin's group was alone in the field. The
methodology taken up by Schally was essentially the same as
Guillemin's except that they respectively worked with porcine and
ovine brain extracts. But despite the fact that each of the two groups led
by Guillemin and Schally worked in the same area and used similar
methods, there was an essential difference in their beliefs. 9 In
particular, Guillemin's group did not believe that results produced by
Schally's group to the same extent that Schally's group believed those
produced by Guillemin. This asymmetry helps explain why Schally
went on to confirm the nonpeptidic nature of TRF.
   Between 1962 and 1969 (inclusive), the two groups published a
total of forty-one papers concerned exclusively with the isolation and
characterisation of TRF. Of these, twenty-four were published by
Guillemin's group and seventeen by Schally's group. This difference
in output reflects the fact that TRF was the main programme of
Guillemin's group for eight years, whereas it was only a secondary
programme for Schally's group for four years. As late as 1969, Schally
remarked that he was not interested in TRH.
   The pattern of citations also reveals a marked asymmetry between
the two groups. Whereas Guillemin's group cited their own articles in
the TRF area one hundred and three times, they cited Schally's papers
on the same question a mere twenty-five times. Schally's group, on the
other hand, cited their own papers (forty-seven times) with roughly the
same frequency as articles by Guillemin's group (thirty-nine times).
Whereas Guillemin's group cited papers within the group but outside
the TRF field only twenty-eight times, Schally's group cited the
equivalent body of papers fifty-seven times. This tends to indicate that
Guillemin's groups had constituted a new methodology on which they
relied heavily, whereas Schally's group was more reliant both on
Guillemin's work and other outside sources.
   If we now consider the nature of citations between the groups, rather
than just their number, the asymmetry is even more striking. 10 For all
citations of Guillemin's papers by Schally (and vice versa) we
identified the nature of citing operations in terms of borrowing or
transforming. Figures 3.3a and 3.3b represent citations by Guillemin
Figure 3.3a & b
This figure is derived from Fig. 3.2. Only the major publications are
shown, and those of Guillemin's (G) and Schally's (S) groups are separated for illustrative purposes. In both figures 3a and 3b, Guillemin's
group's papers lie along the diagonal, with those of Schally's group on
either side of the diagonal. The main citing operations of each group on
the other's papers are represented in simplified form by arrows between
papers. Borrowing operations are represented by arrows from cited to
citing papers; transforming operations are represented by arrows from
citing to cited papers. The plus and minus signs indicate the sense of
transformation.


132
The Construction of a Fact                                     133




of Schally and Schally and Guillemin respectively. In these figures,
borrowing operations are represented by arrows from died to citing
papers. For transforming operations, the arrow is in the reverse
direction. In addition, a plus or minus sign indicates whether a
transforming operation was a confirmation or refutation. The figures
show that all citations made by Schally were directed towards
Guillemin's initial work and constituted either borrowing or confirming operations (apart from two negative citations of one paper).
This reflects the fact that Schally found it unnecessary to modify
Guillemin's findings. By contrast, almost all the citations made by
Guillemin constitute negative transformations. Closer inspection
reveals that those of Guillemin's citations that performed borrowing
operations were made to papers by Schally which had previously
134                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


confirmed work by Guillemin. For example, one of Guillemin's papers
contains the comment that "this paper [reference to a paper by
Schally's group] confirmed our former hypothesis." Such differences
are too striking to be interpreted simply as differences in citation
practice. Instead, we propose that they reflect an essential asymmetry
of confidence between the two groups.
   We have already suggested that the meaning of TRF(H) was
negotiated with reference to particular contexts which comprised both
the material layout of the laboratories and the particular strategies
adopted by the two competing groups. This is best illustrated by way of
an example.
   In 1966, Schally published a paper in the wake of Guillemin's
suggestion that TRF might not be a polypeptide. The tentative
suggestion earlier put forward by Guillemin's group-"These results
are compatible with the hypothesis that TRF may not be a simple
polypeptide" (Burgus et al., 1966)-was borrowed as a quasi-fact in
Schally's 1966 paper: "purified materials appear not to be a simple
polypeptide since amino acids account for only 30% of its composition" (Schally et al., 1968). As we have already noted, a low
concentration of amino acid could be taken as establishing either that
the substance was not pure or that it was not a peptide, according to
context. Schally's belief in Guillemin's new hypothesis persuaded
Schally to accept the interpretation that TRF(H) was not a peptide.
This would be unremarkable but for the fact that in accepting this
interpretation, Schally was invalidating the amino acid composition
which he himself found: "After hydrolysis TRF was shown to contain
3 amino acids, histidine, glutamic acid and proline which were present
in equimolar ratio and which accounted for 30% of the dry weight of
TRF" (Schally et al., 1966). In the light of a subsequent change of
context this statement was to seem extraordinary (see below). In
 1966, Guillemin did not believe Schally's findings. It is also clear
however, that Schally did not believe his own findings. Thus, Schally,
wrote at the end of his 1966 paper:

  The results are consistent with a hypothesis that TRF is not a simple
  polypeptide as has been thought previously, but nevertheless our
  evidence indicated that 3 amino acids are present in this molecule
  (Schally et al., 1966).

  In order to test the hypothesis that TRF was not a peptide, Schally
ordered eight synthetic compounds from a chemical company. Each of
The Construction of a Fact                                                    135


these compounds contained three amino acids (His, Pro, and Glu) in
all possible permutations. Schally tested each compound and when, a
few months later, he had failed to find any activity he concluded: "This
indicates that the moiety which formed at least 70% of the TRH
molecule is essential for biological activity" (Schally et al., 1968).
   It is clear that if Schally had not believed Guillemin's hypothesis, he
would have found the structure of TRF(H) in 1966. If he had not
believed Guillemin's hypothesis, Schally might have concluded that a
specific arrangement of the three amino acids was necessary to explain
the lack of activity. Similarly, if Guillemin had believed Schally's
result, he could also have found the structure in 1966. But when
Guillemin referred to Schally's "isolation," it was always with the use
of quotation marks. A curious crossing of paths thus occurred. Schally
gave up his hypothesis because of Guillemin's suggestion that TRF
may not be a simple polypeptide. He was later to regret this: "the field
was sorely confused by your strange theory published in . . . that
releasing hormones and TRH are not polypeptides" (Schally to
Guillemin, 1968).
   In 1968, Guillemin "independently" found that three amino acids
(His, Pro, and Glu) existed in equimolar ratio and that 80% of the
weight was accounted for by amino acids. As a result, Schally
resurrected the earlier programme which had almost ceased and
relocated his 1966 paper as part of a chronology which supported his
claim that he had been right from the beginning. The ambiguity of
Schally's retrospective reassessment of his 1966 paper is clearly
apparent in the reasons he gave for not immediately following up his
 1966 results:

       S:   I don't see why we discuss that . . . in 1966 I got the
            structure . . . everyone agrees on that . . . it's all written. . . .
     Qu:    But why did you doubt your own results?
      S:    But I dropped the question. It was of not interest to me. My
            interest was in reproduction and control of growth hormones
            . . . . I didn't have a good chemist, I gave it to . . . he was too
            busy; he had 5000 things to do . . . he never came up with
            anything, nothing was done for 2 or 3 years.
     Qu:    But why did you conclude that TRH was not a peptide?
      S:    Because there was no activity. We believed Guillemin.
            (Schally stands up, picks up a copy of one of Guillemin's
            papers and begins to quote from it. . . .)
136                                                     LABORATORY LIFE


      Qu:   Why did you believe in Guillemin's mistake?
       S:   We never believed in it. . . It's a very difficult thing . . . we
            found impure fractions . . . there was no activity . . . when
            Guillemin came up with his idea of a nonpeptidic moiety we
            followed him. It's something that can always happen (Schally,
            int., 1976).

   This example demonstrates that the logic of deduction cannot be
isolated from its sociological grounds. We can say, for example, that
Schally "logically" deduced that TRF was not a polypeptide only if we
simultaneously appreciate that the weight given to Guillemin's theory
was stronger at that time than the weight given to the evidence
produced by Schally. Guillemin was "logical" in concluding that the
enzyme test showed TRF not to be a peptide only in the sense that he
placed more confidence in the enzyme test than in the notion that all
releasing factors are peptides. Following Bloor (1976), we would say
that "logically" possible alternatives were deflected by prevalent
beliefs. For instance, Guillemin eliminated the possibility that his
enzyme test was incomplete. In testing for the activity of different
permutations of synthetic amino acids, Schally eliminated the possibility that changes in the chemical structure of an amino acid might
cause activity. Every modification of context entails the making of
different deductions, each of which will be equally "logical" (see
below). It is thus important to realise that when a deduction is said not
to be logical, or when we say that a logical possibility was deflected by
belief, or that other deductions later became possible, this is done with
the benefit of hindsight, and this hindsight provides another context
within which we pronounce on the logic or illogic of a deduction. The
list of possible alternatives by which we can evaluate the logic of a
deduction is sociologically (rather than logically) determined.
   By 1968, a large number of techniques from other disciplines had
been imported into the TRF field, as indicated by the extent of new
citations by TRF papers (see Fig. 3.2). The adoption of the strategy to
"go for the structure at all cost" entailed both the use of techniques
from other disciplines and a resultant modification of the nature of the
research task. Firstly, participants drew upon more established areas
of classical endocrinology in order to obtain reliable bioassays.
Secondly, they borrowed purification techniques from peptide chemistry. This turned out to be relatively easy since Guillemin had already
obtained a 1,000,000-fold purification as early as 1966. Thirdly,
participants amassed a vast quantity of brain extracts (Fig. 3.4).
Figure 3.4
As in Figure 3.3 this is a simplified representation of the TRF area. This
time only Guillemin's papers are shown, and only those operations
corresponding to the borrowing of techniques are represented. The
continuous arrows indicate the extent to which the group quotes its own
articles; the discontinuous arrows indicate from which major fields
(and when) the development of the TRF area necessitated import. Once
again, the complete mesh of all the operations is a fairly good approximation of the field-as far as papers are concerned. In this case it shows
the material layout on which the signs of the existence of TRF could be
constructed.

                                                                    137
138                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


Although exacting, this task required little more than good management and a great deal of patience. This three-fold transformation of the
TRF area greatly raised research standards. Indeed, such was the
degree of required chemical expertise that several competing groups
(groups which in Schally's terms "lacked guts") found themselves
ruined.
   At the same time, the adoption of a strategy with an all or nothing
object entailed enormous risks. Even if they obtained highly purified
material, researchers' efforts would count for little if they failed to
determine the structure. The borrowing of techniques of analytical
chemistry entailed the use of expertise and equipment which was
costlier than borrowing techniques of purification chemistry. One
reason for this was the instrumentation of analytical chemistry itself
incorporated many of the advances of physics. In particular, peptide
chemistry had developed powerful tools for determining the structure
of biological substances. However, researchers experienced some
difficulty in relocating themselves within this neighbouring field.
While located within physiology, TRF remained an interesting
substance in that its mode of action could be studied, even though its
structure could not unambiguously be identified. In order to achieve
such identification it was necessary to relocate the substance in the
new context of analytical peptide chemistry. The frustrations met by
researchers in their attempts to achieve this relocation are well
illustrated in the following passage written in 1968:

  Our efforts at characterizing the chemical structure of TRF have led us
  to the conclusion that we are dealing with a rather difficult problem for
  which classical methodology is turning out to be of only limited
  significance. With the preparations of highly purified TRF which we
  have studied so far, the material has appeared to be non-volatile at
  atmospheric pressure which precludes the use of gas chromatography,
  or in high vacuum of the order of 10 - 7 torr even at 130°C, which pre-
  cludes the use of mass spectrometry to study it. The classical derivatives
  which are usually made in these circumstances (methyl, trimethyl sylyl,
  pivalyl) have not yet proved to be of any help in studying this problem.
  Nuclear magnetic resonance spectra of highly purified TRF at 60, 100
  or 220 megahertz with time averaging have not yielded any meaningful
  information except that we may be dealing with a highly saturated
  alicyclic or heterocyclic structure with peripheral CH3 groups, without
  completely ruling out a polyamide structure. Infrared and ultraviolet
  spectra have not contributed much information either. One of the main
The Construction of a Fact                                                  139


  problems here is that of the usually minute quantities of materials avail-
  able for each one of these methods which are thus stretched to their level
  of highest sensitivity with a corresponding loss of specificity of the
  information obtained. In view of the extremely high cost of the starting
  material and the minute quantities of pure TRF that can be obtained
  from this starting material it would appear that the solution to the chem-
  ical characterization of the molecule of TRF will require some of the
  most advanced methodology that physical or organic chemistry is
  presently offering or still in the process of developing. . . . More reward-
  ing have been a series of experiments dealing with the physiological
  studies with TRF (Guillemin et al., 1968:579).
    In other words, it was felt that the initial strategy of going for the
sequence rather than the mode of action might have been a mistake. At
 a symposium held in Tokyo and attended by the majority of researchers
in the TRF subfield, there were a number of exchanges between those
convinced of the value of the chemical approach and physiologists
 such as Harris, who saw no virtue in committing the whole field to this
task. In 1966 McCann received the Endocrine Society award. This
had the effect of legitimating the classical physiological approach to
the problem, just at the time when both Schally and Guillemin were
bogged down in the most difficult part of their chemical extraction
work.
    Many participants were by now aware of the radical differences
implied by the new approach, of the growing competition between the
groups led by Schally and Guillemin and of the extreme difficulty in
effecting a transition between isolation and analytic chemistry.
However, no one was as puzzled by the state of the field as the funding
agencies. For eight years increasing amounts of money had been
invested in the field, but fewer and fewer results had emerged. At the
end of 1968, the situation came to a head when a review committee of
the NIH was set up to assess what was wrong in the field and, in
particular, to assess researchers' chemical expertise and to review the
likelihood of them obtaining the structure (Burgus, 1976; McCann,
 1976; Guillemin, 1975 ; Wade, 1978). Clearly, the principle of laissez
faire was not respected at this time. Researchers in the field were
summoned to Tucson in January 1969 to show where they stood,
under explicit threat of the possible withdrawal of funding and a
subsequent return to the cheaper but more rewarding realms of
classical physiology.
   Guillemin, who was just getting new results, did everything he could
to delay this meeting for several months (Guillemin, 1976). In
140                                                      LABORATORY LIFE


common with other members of his laboratory, he felt that the public
exposure of preliminary results would do more harm than good. By this
stage, however, he had begun to collaborate with Burgus, a chemist
attracted to the field once the stability of the TRF assay had convinced
him that the use of analytic chemistry would not be wasted on an
elusive substance, as CRF had turned out to be (Burgus, 1976).
Indeed, everything depended on Burgus's chemistry. Guillemin was
not a chemist. Schally had stopped working on the programme, and
only Burgus could guarantee access to the harder field. It is difficult to
assess whether or not the programme would have been discontinued at
this point if Burgus had not presented convincing results. The process
of accumulating materials and brain extracts had probably passed a
point of no return some time in 1968. Nevertheless, access to
chemistry might have been prevented by a lack of funds, and a long
delay might have occurred if the funding agencies had carried out their
threat.
   At the Tucson symposium held in January 1969, many participants
reported feeling intensely discouraged after the opening sessions. No
headway had been made, the chemistry being used appeared somewhat dubious, and there were some open disputes between chemists
and endocrinologists. But the situation changed when Burgus began to
speak:

   [W]ith the availability of the 1 mg of material which we have just
   obtained in the last few weeks, we have finally been able to obtain an
   amino acid analysis:
                  His: 28.5 Glu: 28.1 Pro: 29.2
     . . . these amino acids together make up 80% of the total weight of the
   preparation (Burgus and Guillemin, 1970a: 233).

This demonstrated that TRF comprised three amino acids in equimolar ratio. In other words, the idea that TRF was not a peptide was
probably wrong. As a result, the argument that TRF was not
inactivated by enzymes and was thus not a peptide was reversed. A
subsequent explanation of the lack of enzyme inactivation portrayed
the earlier work as mistaken:
  It is not surprising that the proteolytic enzymes do not act on the
  molecule considering the three amino acids that are present. We have
  also considered the possibility of a cyclic or protected peptide being
  involved which would also explain the resistance to proteases (Burgus
  and Guillemin, 1970a:236).
The Construction of a Fact                                                  141


However, Burgus stopped short of claiming that TRF was a peptide
and nothing else. When asked about this in the following discussion, he
stressed the dramatic turn which had taken place when he explained
why a follow-up experiment had not yet been carried out: "Our mode
of thinking on the polypeptide nature of this material has changed
basically in the last 2 or 3 weeks" (Burgus and Guillemin, 1970b:
239). The precise details of the way this change had come about were
not immediately apparent. Nevertheless, from the point of view of the
sponsors of the symposium, Burgus's results came as a relief.
Everyone congratulated the speakers. One of the chemists who had
been especially invited to monitor the quality of the chemistry
commented:

   I would like to congratulate Drs. Burgus and Guillemin, and also Dr.
   Schally on two very elegant and exciting chemical papers; I am sure that
   many of us feel that things are getting rather close now, and the criteria
   for purity in both cases were extremely impressive (Meites, 1970: 238).

The closeness mentioned here refers to the singular objective, pursued
by both Guillemin and Schally, of obtaining the structure of TRF using
peptide chemistry. The reference to impressive criteria clearly reflects
the increase in standards between one professional boundary and
another. Several respondents recalled their feelings of optimism that
the field would be saved and that money would not stop.
   Bearing in mind our earlier discussion, however, it is not surprising
that Schally's reaction was very different. Schally's group contributed
little to the published discussion, except to note that, "incidentally we
were the first to report (in 1966) that these are the three amino acids in
the molecule of TRF" (Meites, 1970: 238). However, his recollections in interview were more vivid:

   But at the Tucson meeting, when I heard the report of G u i l l e m i n , my
   God, I thought we were on the right track all along in 1 966. It came as a
   complete surprise to me . . . we worked like hell . . . then I immediately
   made a pact w i t h F. ( S c h a l l y , int., 1976).

In the context established by Burgus's results, Schally's 1966 paper
not only became worth believing, it also became the retrospective
precursor of the Tucson paper and hence provided his major claim to
credit.
142                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


Narrowing Down the Possibilities
   A bioassay carried out on a partially purified fraction can be thought
of as a "soft" technique in the sense that each resulting inscription can
be interpreted in tens of different ways. By contrast, an amino acid
analysis (AAA) is "hard" in the sense that the number of possible
statements which could fit each inscription is very much smaller
(Moore et al., 1958). The difference between soft and hard techniques
does not depend on any absolute evaluation of the quality of
techniques. Hardness simply refers to the fact that a particular
material layout permits the advanced elimination of many more
alternative explanations (see Ch. 6).
   In 1962 Guillemin had decided to go for the TRF structure. By
1968, however, he had not yet obtained the single interpretation that
this goal necessitated. TRF had become both an active fraction in
bioassays and a sizable (1 mg) sample in an amino acid analyzer. The
use of analytic chemistry made it possible to believe both that TRF had
existed between 1962 and 1968 and that three amino acids were
present in the molecule. But TRF could still have been a variety of
other things; it might have been histidine, glutamic acid, and proline in
any one of six possible combinations; it might also have been a three,
six, or nine amino acid sequence (the same sequence being repeated
several times); finally, it could merely have been a component of a
larger active molecule, since 20% of the weight was still unaccounted
for. In other words, although between 1966 and 1969, Burgus had
dramatically narrowed the number of possibilities by importing more
and more techniques of analytic chemistry, too many remained. At the
same time, it was becoming yet more difficult to eliminate the last few
possibilities because researchers were nearing the limits of sensitivity
of their instruments.
   Each new experiment could redefine the range of possible alternative explanations. 1 1 For instance, what was known about the weight of
TRF was compatible with a tri-, a hexa-, or a nona-peptide. Once the
weight was taken as reliable, the alternative explanation that TRF was
more than a nona-peptide was eliminated because of its incompatibility
with this fact. From another point of view, however, the range of
alternative explanations could be increased. Burgus, for instance, did
not believe that TRF was merely a peptide, still less that it was a simple
tripeptide. Consequently, he delayed his final choice by considering a
larger number of possibilities than eventually turned out to be
The Construction of a Fact                                         143


necessary. In a similar way, each new method, each fresh exchange
with colleagues and each change in the evaluation of colleagues'
beliefs either widened or narrowed the range of possible alternatives.
At the Tucson meeting, considerable excitement was engendered by
the sudden realisation that after seven years of unrewarding work, the
number of possible characterisations of TRF was dramatically reduced. In 1962 TRF might have consisted of any of the combinations
of the twenty amino acids then known; by 1966, the range of
alternatives had been increased-TRF might also have been some
other possible arrangement of a nonpeptidic nature. Suddenly, in
 1969, it could only be one of twenty or thirty possibilities. In the
seventy years of analytical chemistry, the strategy used to attain one
such possibility was to talk of the substance in terms of its primary
structure (Lehninger, 1975).
   The ultimate objective was to attain the particular structure of TRF.
It was an ultimate objective because, once attained, a synthetic replica
could be produced and compared with the original substance. It was
also ultimate in the sense that, given the choice of strategy, nothing
further remained to be known. Aristotle defined a substance as
something more than its attribute. In chemistry, however, a substance
can be so completely reduced to its attribute that an exactly similar
substance can be obtained de novo (Bachelard, 1934). This in part
explains participants' fascination for the objective. If the exact
structure could be obtained, some of the solidity of chemistry and
molecular biology could be injected into endocrinology. Or, at least,
one unknown ("what exactly is it that we inject?") could be eliminated
and the sophistication of all subsequent bioassays could be enhanced.
   The requirements for stabilising the structure of TRF were simple:
Traces obtained from inscription devices had to be transposed into the
language of chemistry. It was known that only three amino acids were
present in the substance and that only one arrangement of these acids
could trigger activity. The difficulty of identifying the particular
arrangement of the amino acids in 1969 is illustrated by Table 3.1.
Each of the structures proposed resulted from the application of a new
method to the problem and each survived only a few months.
Obviously, it is necessary to show precisely how this flux of different
names stabilized into one single sequence.
   One indirect means of determining the sequence was to synthesize
all six possible combinations of the three amino acids known to exist in
equimolar ratio in TRF. As we saw above, Schally did this in 1968 but
144                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


failed to find any activity. Burgus followed the same approach in 1969
and similarly found that none of the synthetic peptides exhibited
activity. By 1969, however, the context had changed. Instead of
concluding, as Schally had done two years earlier, that TRF was not a
peptide, Burgus's negative results were taken as evidence that "something should be done to the N terminal." This involved further
chemical manipulation of all six peptides. As a result of one such
manipulation, known as "acetylation," it was found that one and only
one peptide showed activity: "it seems that the sequence R-Glu-HisPro is necessary to biological activity, instead of any distribution of the
three amino-acids" (Burgus et al., 1969: 2116).
   The synthetic replica of TRF was thus known before knowledge of
the natural TRF had been constructed. In other words, the use of
synthetic chemistry was sufficient to narrow down the possible
sequences of TRF from six to one, without having to touch the
precious micrograms of the natural extract.
   This operation, however, demonstrated only that the synthetic
material R-Glu-His-Pro was biologically active, not that natural TRF
had the structure R-Glu-His-Pro. To demonstate this further point,
inscriptions obtained both from natural and from synthetic material
had to be compared. Schally's group tried to do this by comparing the
thin layer chromatographs (TLC) of the two substances in twenty
different systems. But this was not regarded as an acceptable proof in
Guillemin's laboratory. Whether or not the number and quality of
inscriptions constituted a proof depended on negotiations between
members. It was extremely difficult to decide whether or not two
chromatographs (one for synthetic and one for the natural sample)
were similar. Having evaluated small differences as meaningful,
Burgus wrote: "Given the difference of specific activity and of
behaviour in several Chromatographie systems, it was obvious that
Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-OH was not identical to native TRF" (Burgus et
al., 1969b: 226). He went on to propose a further modification which
would reduce the remaining small differences and thus allow the
specification of one sequence for TRF: "One of the most interesting
structures would be Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-amide, because there exist a
great number of biologically active polypeptides with a C terminal
which is amidated" (Burgus et al., 1969b: 227).
   The notion that the peptide could also be amidated led to the
fabrication of a compound which would reduce the difference between
the two sets of observations on the Chromatograph. Indeed, once
The Construction of a Fact                                             145


synthesized, this new compound was found to be similar to natural
TRF both in bioassays and in other inscription devices: "[T]he
properties of TRF most closely matched that of the amide, failing to
separate from the synthetic compound in four different systems of
TLC when run in mixtures" (Burgus et al., 1970).
   It would be inadequate for us simply to conclude that TRF is or is
not Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2. Difference or identity do not exist per se;
rather they depend on the context in which they are used and on
negotiations between investigators. It was thus possible either to
dismiss a difference as minor noise or to deem it a major discrepancy.
Guillemin's group observed "slight differences" between natural and
synthetic compounds as revealed by various inscription devices. So
seriously did they view these slight differences, however, that in the
paper published in July they wrote, "Thus, the structure of TRF is not
Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-OH, Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-OMe nor Pyro-Glu-HisPro-NH 2 " (Burgus et al., 1969b: 228) But for this statement there
would have been no subsequent dispute over the allocation of credit
and the story would have ended in July 1969.12
   While Guillemin's group were considering more possibilities than
turned out to be necessary, Schally's group published two papers
(written by Folkers and submitted on August 8, 1969 and September
22, 1969). In these papers, neither the revelation at the Tucson
meeting nor the period between 1966 and 1969 are mentioned.
Instead, the 1966 paper was portrayed as the first in which the correct
amino acid analysis had been given. The first of Folker's 1969 papers,
entitled "Discovery of Modification of the Synthetic Tripeptide
Sequence of the TRH Having Activity," refers to Pyro-Glu-HisPro-NH 2 as one of several active peptides. Guillemin, however,
claimed that this idea had been passed from one group to another
during an informal talk at the June (1969) meeting of the Endocrine
Society. It is as difficult to establish the truth of this claim as it is of
Schally's response (private communication, 1976) that he already
knew of this modification but had been "instructed not to tell." The
second of Folker's 1969 papers, entitled "Identity of TRH and PyroGlu-His-Pro-NH 2 " (Boler et al., 1969), records Folker's decision to
deem identical the natural and synthetic substances. To fortify his
claim to priority, Folker cited Burgus's paper: "Burgus et al (1969b)
states that the structure of ovine TRH is not that of Pyro-Glu-HisPro-NR, and that a secondary or tertiary amide modification is not
excluded" (Boler et al., 1969: 707). Curiously, however, Boler et al.
146                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


appear to contradict this statement in the next paragraph of the same
paper: "If the structure of TRH is not that of Pyro-Glu-HisPro(NH2), then certain possibilities are evident" (Boler et al., 1969:
707). In other words, Folkers toyed with alternative structures of TRF
even though his paper's title indicated that he had definitely settled on
one. This is a good example of what the style of a paper can achieve.
Schally's statements allowed Guillemin's group to accuse Schally's
group of double talk. As far as Guillemin's group was concerned,
Schally did not have greater proof than they that Pyro-Glu-His-ProNH2 was the structure. Rather, they saw Schally's statements both as
an expression of confidence in Burgus's argument and as a means of
beating the "overcautious" Burgus by two months. As we have shown
above, Burgus could not rely on Schally but had to establish fresh
sources of information.
   Given the organisation of peptide chemistry at this time, Burgus
considered that only mass spectrometry could provide a fully satisfactory answer to the problem of evaluating the differences between
natural and synthetic TRF. Once a spectrometer had been provided,
no one would argue anymore. 13 The strength of the mass spectrometer
is given by the physics it embodies. It is not our purpose here to study
the social history of mass spectrometry. Suffice to say that for a
peptide chemist its use constituted the ultimate argument because, as
Burgus ( 1976) put it: "it eliminates all but a few possibilities." The use
of chromatographs alone could enable chemists to continue arguing
that the structure of TRF might be different and to propose alternative
interpretations. Thus Burgus (1976) made the following comment
about Schally's use of thin layer chromatography (TLC): "any good
chemist will tell you that TLC does not make a proof. " The only way to
avoid further argument and to settle the question was through mass
spectrometry. Whereas similarity between the traces of synthetic and
natural material could be taken to be coincidental in other systems,
mass spectrometers provided information at the level of atomic
structure. Although there might be thousands of ways of explaining
similar activity in an assay, or in a Chromatograph, there were only
very few possibilities for explaining similarity in a mass spectrometer.
Burgus therefore forecast that whoever obtained the spectra of natural
and synthetic TRF would settle the question for ever (see Table 3.1).
   Unfortunately, the use of mass spectrometry had thus far been
limited because the sample of TRF was not volatile. Without the
means of making samples volatile, the final unambiguous determina-
The Construction of a Fact                                            147




tion of structure could not be made. Consequently, there ensued a
period of several months during which investigators tried several ways
of inserting the sample into the mass spectrometer in such a way that it
 became volatile. "This is not a major technological advance, but it is
one made for this particular program . . . that is why it took so long, we
 had to stop and develop this technique" (Burgus, 1976).
   Finally, Burgus was able (sometime in September 1969) to introduce the natural sample into the mass spectrometer, and to obtain a
spectrum that no one in the field could interpret as being significantly
different from that for the synthetic material: "This is the first instance
of the structure of a natural product being determined on the basis of its
similarity with a synthetic product" (Burgus and Guillemin, 1970).
   Here we reach a turning point in the TRF story. Researchers in the
TRF field no longer said that natural TRF had a spectrum "similar to"
Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH 2 , nor that TRF was "like" the synthetic compound Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2. Instead, a major ontological change
took place (see Ch. 4). Participants were now saying that TRF is
Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2. The predicate became absolute, all modalities
were dropped and the chemical name began to be the name of a real
structure. Immediately, the status of TRF was transformed into that of
a fact, and statement such as "Guillemin and Schally have established
that TRF is Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH 2 " became commonplace.
148                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


TRF Moves into Other Networks
   The pure fraction of TRF obtained by the use of highly sophisticated
tools of analytic chemistry could be identified simply in terms of a
string of eight syllables. This label will remain unambiguous as long as
analytical chemistry and the physics of mass spectrometry remain
unaltered. The advantage of having situated TRF in the relatively
restrictive context of analytic chemistry became obvious as early as
November 1969. To find out what TRF was before this date would
have entailed a laborious search through a complex mesh of forty-one
papers, full of contradictory statements, partial interpretations, and
half-baked chemistry. After November 1969, however, eight syllables
enabled the rapid spread of news by telephone or by word of mouth and
thus raised the possibility of a radical change of network structure. A
tiny group of specialists might have concerned themselves with the
same problem for years, simply by citing a relatively small number of
papers. Now, however, a considerably larger public could use the eight
syllable formula as a fresh starting point for their research. The three
amino acid formula also had the substantial advantage that it could be
used to order as great a quantity of the substance from any chemical
company as money was available to pay for it.
   The crucial point we have tried repeatedly to stress in this chapter is
that once one and only one purified structure had been chosen out of all
the equally probable structures, a decisive metamorphosis occurred in
the nature of the constructed object. A few weeks after the stabilisation
of TRF, nonproblematic samples of the purified material began to
circulate within circles of researchers far removed from the original
groups led by Guillemin and Schally. These circles comprised groups
and laboratories which the impure, problematic fractions (found only
to be active in cumbersome and unreliable assays) would never have
reached. For these new groups TRF rapidly become taken for granted.
Its history began to fade away, and remaining traces and scars of its
production become less and less significant for practising scientists.
Instead, TRF became just one more of the many tools utilised as part of
long research programmes.
   The difference between the eight years of effort and the simplicity of
the final structure of three amino acids; the disproportion between the
tons of hypothalami that were processed and the mere micrograms of
substance which were eventually obtained; the fierce competition
between the two groups; the drama of the Tucson meeting-all these
The Construction of a Fact                                                           149


features enabled TRF to take on a new significance within yet another
network-that of the press. TRF became a story and the use of tons of
sheep's brain a myth. People who had been totally disinterested by the
production of forty-one articles over ten years could now become
interested in the final event which they, in turn, helped to highlight and
dramatise. 14



                                     NOTES
      1. We use the term in the sense developed by Bloor ( 1976). Our particular interest
is with the aspect of the strong programme which Bloor refers to as "impartiality"
(1976: 5). However, our contention is not just that sociological explanation should be
impartial with respect to truth or falsity, and that both sides of the dichotomy require
explanation. Our argument is that the implicit (or explict) adoption of a truth value
alters the form of explanatory account which is produced.
      2. Since the award to one of our informants of the Nobel Prize for medicine for this
 episode, a number of journalistic accounts have appeared. It is of interest to compare the
present account with these. See especially Wade ( 1978) and Donovan et al. (forthcoming).
      3. The figures used here are based on three sources: firstly, we used the
publication lists of the two main groups engaged in the work; secondly, we recorded all
the references in these articles; thirdly, we checked the resulting corpus for completeness against Index Medicus and Permuterm. All references to these papers were
obtained either from the SCI or from the other papers in the corpus.
      4. The difference between the two expressions also reflects a difference of
paradigm. To refer to the substance as a "hormone" means that it is not a new class of
substance. Work on "hormones" consequently fits within the classical framework of
endocrinology. To call the substance a "factor," on the other hand, permits the
integration of the substance in other series of terms (neurotransmitor, for instance) or in
a new class by itself (cybernins, for instance) [see, for instance, Guillemin 1976].
      5. There are many accounts of this dispute (Wade 1978), some by the participants
themselves (Donovan et al., forthcoming). The subject has been treated ad nauseam
both in neuroendocrinology and in the press. These accounts concern the kind of
obvious social factors which are not of major interest to our argument here: our intention
is to analyse the nature of TRF itself. We do not therefore attempt closely to analyse the
controversy about chronology. For practical purposes, we follow the California group's
accounts more closely.
      6. The new restraints that Guillemin imposed on the problem met the approval of
the major agencies, especially the American ones. He had already accumulated a large
capital of confidence: the monetary capital could be lent him with some certitude of
return, even though his demands were very high. For instance in a $100,000 grant
application to NIH for buying hypothalami, Guillemin wrote: "A considerable
investment has already been made in terms of money, time, and effort in this
programme. I consider the present request as a sine qua non for its completion" ( 1965).
      7. In the first year, the literature produced by the group included the following: an
article describing the "method of calculation and analysis of results of the McKenzie
150                                                               LABORATORY LIFE


essay for Thyrotropin," which is a statistical study including details of computer
programming; articles describing the "modified McKenzie assay"; "a proposal for a
reference standard" to ease comparison with other investigations; and articles on
"methods of purification and collection." The set of techniques so gathered constitute
the circumstances through which TRF gained some stability of existence (see Fig 3.4
and Ch. 6).
      8. The transformation of accent is common in the study of religion but has yet to be
carried out in science. Science is discourse, one effect of which is to assert that it speaks
the truth. Lyotard (1975) has shown some of these effects: Knorr (submitted) has
studied how the work of writing transforms research findings. The "author," the
"theory," the "nature," and the "public" are all effects of the text. This is especially
important in historical accounts. See Barthes (1966).
      9. We shall return to a discussion of the term belief in Chapter 6. It is not solely a
cognitive term. It also refers to the assessment of investments to be made in an area, the
type of equipment to be purchased, which kinds of inscription device are most valued,
what counts as a proof, and so on. Guillemin defined the area in such a way that when
Schally came to set up a laboratory in competition, he had almost exactly to duplicate
the organisation of Guillemin's laboratory. The notion of assymmetry of belief needs to be
understood with this material background in mind.
    10. The nature of citation refers to Chapter 2 (last section) and to the article by
Latour (1976). It is clear that this is a crude reflection of the sum total of operations
made by papers on one another, but even in this rough form they provide a useful
indication of the agonistic field.
    11. We have to wait until Chapter 6 before considering the notion of "alternative"
on firmer ground. It is obvious at this point that the number of alternatives depends on
the agonistic field and that the elimination of one or other alternative depends on the
relative weight given to any of the inscriptions.
    12. Once again it is necessary not to be taken in by the wording of historical
discourse. The notion of the end of a story (as we showed above) depended on the
Guillemin's strategy to obtain the structure; it depended also on the way a statement
was qualified by Burgus et al. in their 1969b article and on the numerous accounts that
Schally and Guillemin later gave.
    13. The mass spectrometer constitutes a black box. It is precisely because of this
character that it provides most of the hardness of the field (see Ch. 6). The large
prototype of the middle thirties has now become a compact and commonplace piece of
equipment, which incorporates a computer to carry out most of the initial interpretations. It has been applied to organic chemistry for thirty years, and specifically to
peptides as early as 1959. The extension of its use to releasing factors was thus a
relatively small step. Given Guillemin's strategy, no other final proof was available.
The power of the equipment lies in the fact that the inscription (the spectrum) is
obtained by direct contact of the electron flow with the sampled molecules (Beynon,
1960). Although the number of mediations is very great (Bachelard, 1934), each of the
indications is black-boxed, and incorporated into a piece of furniture. Consequently,
the final result is taken as incontrovertible.
    14. See, for example, Medical World News, January 16, 1970; Le Monde,
January 15, 1970. Each of the numerous articles of this period insist on the fierce
competition between Schally and Guillemin, and on the clinical importance of their
discoveries. The Nobel Prize, awarded in large part because of the TRF story,
regenerated a similar rush of stories in the press.
Chapter 4



THE MICROPROCESSING OF FACTS




Our initial visit to the laboratory established the central importance of
literary inscription for laboratory activity: the work of the laboratory
can be understood in terms of the continual generation of a variety of
documents, which are used to effect the transformation of statement
types and so enhance or detract from their fact-like status. In the last
chapter, our historical examination of the genesis of a single fact
demonstrated the influence of laboratory context in delimiting the
number of alternative statements which could be made: only by virtue
of a crucial shift between one network and another could a particular
statement begin circulation as a fact. On the basis of our argument so
far, however, it might be argued that we have as yet to penetrate the
very essence of scientific activity, that our description of fact construction has left untouched those aspects of scientific activity which have
to do with "logic" and "reasoning." In this chapter, therefore, we
return to a close examination of the day-to-day activities of the
laboratory in order to extend our enquiry into the most intimate
aspects of fact construction. We focus on the routine exchanges and
gestures which pass between scientists and on the way in which such
minutiae are seen to give rise to "logical" arguments, the implementation of "proofs," and the operation of so-called "thought processes."
                                                                      151
152                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


   Our examination of the daily activities of the laboratory entails an
interest in the way in which even the smallest gestures constitute the
social construction of facts. Put another way, our concern in this
chapter is with the microprocesses whereby facts are socially constructed. As we have argued from the beginning, the sense in which we
use the term social refers to phenomena other than the obvious
influence of ideology (Forman, 1971), scandal (Lecourt, 1976), or
macroinstitutional factors (Rose and Rose, 1976). Such factors
scarcely exhaust the social character of science. Moreover, there is a
danger that whenever these kinds of social factors are not immediately
apparent, certain sociologists of science might conclude that the
activity they observe does not fall within their domain of competence.
For example, the history of TRF presented in the last chapter only
once revealed the influence of ideology (p. 123); there was evidence
only of the indirect influence of career determination (p. 119); and
only on three occasions was there any evidence of the influence of
institutional factors (e.g., p. 139). The sense in which social is used by
some sociologists would thus have yielded only a small number of
instances of the clear influence of ideology, manifest dishonesty,
prejudice, and so on. But it would be incorrect to conclude that the
TRF story only exhibits the partial influence of sociological features.
Instead, we claim that TRF is a thoroughly social construction. By
maintaining the sense in which we use social, we hope to be able to
pursue the strong programme at a level apparently beyond traditional
sociological grasp. In Knorr's terms, we want to demonstrate the
idiosyncratic, local, heterogenous, contextual, and multifaceted character of scientific practices (Knorr, in press). We suggest that the
apparently logical character of reasoning is only part of a much more
complex phenomenon that Augé (1975) calls "practices of interpretation" and which comprises local, tacit negotiations, constantly
changing evaluations, and unconscious or institutionalized gestures.
Our objective in this chapter is to show that this is the case and that a
belief in the logical and straightforward character of science itself
arises in the course of these practices of interpretation. In short, we
observe how differences between the logic of scientific and nonscientific practices of interpretation are created and sustained within
the laboratory.
   It is tempting to start from the premise that the nature of scientific
activity is essentially different from those practices of interpretation in
nonscientific activity. As we shall suggest, however, such temptation
The Microprocessing of Facts                                         153


arises in part because scientific practices are all too often displayed
through the use of terms such as hypothesis, proof, and deduction.
The use of such terms renders scientific practice as different, but it is
not clear that they are being used other than tautologically. For
example, Garfinkel (1967, Ch. 8), in relating Schutz's (1953)
description of scientific activity, represents ten criteria of common
sense rationality and adds four which can be taken as peculiar to
science. One of these four criteria is that scientists look for "compatibility of end-means relationships with principles of formal logic"
(p. 267). However, the only difference between this and the corresponding criteria of common sense practice is the appearance in the
former of the term formal logic. As a defining feature of science, the
notion of formal logic is clearly being used tautologically. Another
criteria, "compatibility of the definition of a situation with scientific
knowledge" (p. 268), is identical to its daily life counterpart but for
the inclusion of the word scientific. Once again a criterial feature of
distinctiveness is used tautologically. Although this manoeuvre is
relatively common (Althusser, 1974), it is particularly striking when
employed by an author such as Schutz, who has the professed aim of
describing phenomenologically the actual practice of scientists at
work. Observers familiar with notions fed them by epistemologists find
it easy to identify instances of honorific discourse in scientists'
practical activity. Scientists thus appear to operate scientifically
because they are scientists. For our purposes, the problem is that
major differences between science and common sense are established
as a result of tautological definitions of these differences. Our position
is that if such differences exist, their existence must be demonstrated
empirically. We therefore try to avoid using epistemological concepts
in our portrayal of scientific activity.
   Our examination of the microprocesses of laboratory work is based
on observations of actual laboratory practice. This material, obtained
by virtue of our quasi-anthropological approach, is particularly suited
to an analysis of the intimate details of scientific activity. Sharing the
daily life of scientists for two years provided possibilities far beyond
those afforded by interviews, archival studies or literature searches.
We are thus able to draw upon observations of daily encounters,
working discussions, gestures, and a variety of unguarded behaviour. 1
   In the first section of this chapter we explore the range of interests
and preoccupations apparent in all interactions between members of
the laboratory. In particular, we examine the ways in which facts can
154                                                      LABORATORY LIFE


be created or destroyed during relatively brief conversational exchanges. Secondly, we consider the process whereby the occurrence of
this kind of exchanges becomes transformed into accounts about the
genesis of "ideas" and "thought processes." Finally, we discuss
sources of resistance to the understanding of facts as socially constructed. How can we account sociologically both for the absence of
nonindexical statements and for the belief that there is such a thing as a
nonindexical statement? 2

The Construction and Dismantling of Facts in Conversation
   One way to examine the microprocesses of fact construction in
science is by looking at conversation and discussions between members of the laboratory. For various reasons, it was not possible to taperecord discussions in the laboratory. For a total of twenty-five
discussions, however, notes were compiled which include records of
the timing, gestures, and intonation. A number of informal discussions, including snatches of conversations at benches, in the lobby and
at lunch, were similarly noted. Tape recorders could not be used, so
these notes lack the precision necessary for "conversational analysis." Even in their somewhat crude or "tidied" state, however, these
discussion notes provide a useful opportunity for a close analysis of the
construction of facts.
   We began by considering three short excerpts from an informal
discussion in order to illustrate some of the ways in which arguments
are constantly modified, reinforced, or negated during ordinary
interaction in the laboratory. The conversation took place between
Wilson, Flower, and Smith in the lobby. Smith was on the point of
leaving when Wilson began to talk about an experiment he had done
some days previously:

(a)   Wilson (to Flower): You know how difficult this ACTH assay is, for
                          the lower amount. . . . I was thinking, well, for
                          fifteen years I have wasted my money on his
                          assay . . . Dietrich had calculated an ideal curve.
                          Last time he made a mistake, because if you
                          look at the real data, each time ACTH goes
                          down Endorphin goes down, each time ACTH
                          goes up Endorphin goes up. So we are going to
                          calculate the fit between the two curves. Snoopy
                          did it, it's 0.8.
                  Flower: Wooh!
The Microprocessing of Facts                                            1 55


                Wilson:    And we are going to do it with the means, which
                           is perfectly legal. It will be, I am sure, 0.9
                           (XII, 85).

Wilson and Flower then began to discuss a paper they were writing for
Science. As Smith again started to leave, however, Wilson turned to
him:

(b)   Wilson (to Smith): By the way, I saw on the computer yesterday a
                         93% (match between) haemoglobin . . . or
                         yeast?! . . .
            (to Flower): You know what we are talking about? Our
                         friend Brunick yesterday announced at the
                         Endocrine Society Meeting that he had an
                         amino acid analysis for CRF. You know what
                         happened with his GRF? Smith had a com-
                         puter programme to look at homologies and
                         found a 98% homology with haemoglobin, and
                         I don't know what . . . yeast floating in the
                         air. . . .
                 Flower: That's a case for concern.
      Wilson (laughing): Depends on who you are. . . . (XIII, 85).

   In the first excerpt, the notion that ACTH and endorphin were the
same was reinforced by the suggestion of a probable improvement in
the fit between two curves. As a result, Smith and Flower were
persuaded that the operation met the desired professional standards.
In the second excerpt, however, a colleague's claim was dismissed by
showing an almost perfect fit between CRF, an important and long
sought-after releasing factor, and a piece of haemoglobin, a relatively
trivial protein. The dismissal effect is heightened by the creation of a
link between his recent claim and the well-known blunder which the
same colleague had committed a few years earlier (cf., Wynne, 1976:
327). Brunick had then claimed to have found a very important
releasing factor, which later turned out to be a piece of haemoglobin.
Brunick's recent claim was severely jeopardised by reference to this
past incident. Flower's subsequent comment ("that's a case for
concern") triggered a response which can be taken as indicating
Wilson's high regard for his own professional standards compared to
those of Brunick.
   Smith left when Wilson suggested returning to discussion of the
Science article. Wilson showed Flower a new mapping of the pituitary
vascular system which had been sent to him by a European scientist.
There then ensued a discussion of the map.
1 56                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


(c)            Wilson:   Anyway, the question for this paper is what I
                         said in one of the versions that there was no
                         evidence that there was any psychobehavioural
                         effect of these peptides injected I.V. . . . Can
                         we write that down?
               Flower:   That's a practical question . . . what do we
                         accept as a negative answer? [Flower men-
                         tioned a paper which reported the use of an
                         'enormous' amount of peptides with a positive
                         result.]
               Wilson:    That much?
               Flower:   Yes, so it depends on the peptides . . . but it is
                         very important to do . . .
               Wilson:   I will give you the peptides, yes we have to do
                         it . . . but I'd like to read the paper. . . .
               Flower:   You know it's the one where . . . .
               Wilson:   Oh, I have it, OK.
               Flower:   The threshold is 1 ug. . . . OK, if we want to
                         inject 100 rats (we need at least a few micro-
                         grams) . . . it's a practical issue (XII, 85).

Unlike previous excerpts, this last sequence shows Wilson asking a
series of questions. Wilson and Flower can be thought to have roughly
the same academic status, even though Flower is about ten years
younger than Wilson. They are both heads of laboratories and
members of the National Academy of Science. However, Flower is an
expert in the psychobehavioral effects of neurotransmitters whereas
Wilson is a newcomer to this field. Wilson therefore needs the benefit
of Flower's expertise in writing the collaborative paper (drafts of
which had already been prepared at the time of the above conversation). More specifically, Wilson wants to know the basis for the claim
that the peptides have no activity when injected intravenously (I.V.),
so that they can counter any possible objections to their argument. At
first sight, a Popperian might be delighted by Flower's response. It is
clear, however, that the question does not simply hinge on the presence
or absence of evidence. Rather Flower's comment shows that it
depends on what they choose to accept as negative evidence. For him,
the issue is a practical question. Flower and Wilson follow this
exchange with a discussion of the amount of peptides they require to
investigate the presence of psychobehavioural effects. Wilson had
manufactured these rare and expensive peptides in his own laboratory.
So the question for Flower is what quantity of peptides Wilson is
willing to provide. The discussion between them thus entails a
The Microprocessing of Facts                                           157


complex negotiation about what constitutes a legitimate quantity of
peptides. Wilson has control over the availability of the substances;
Flower has the necessary expertise to determine the amounts of these
substances. At the same time, a claim has been made in the literature
which could make it necessary to consider using an "enormous"
quantity of peptides. In the light of this claim, Wilson's denial that
intravenous injection gives a behavioural effect is weakened. On the
other hand, Wilson argues that the amount of peptides used in the
earlier work is ridiculous because it is far in excess of anything
on a physiological scale. Nevertheless, Wilson agreed to give the
peptides to Flower and to carry out the investigation with the amount
of peptides used by the other researcher. They decided that this was the
only way that Wilson's contention could be supported. Significantly,
this experiment was planned after Wilson's contention had already
been drafted. 3
   Given the context of these discussions, it becomes clear that
negotiation between Flower and Wilson does not depend solely on
their evaluation of the epistemological basis for their work. In other
words, although an idealised view of scientific activity might portray
participants assessing the importance of a particular investigation for
the extension of knowledge, the above excerpts show that entirely
different considerations are involved. When, for example, Flower
says, "it is very important to do . . .," it is possible to envisage a range
of alternative responses about the relative importance of the uses of
peptides. In fact, Wilson's reply ("I will give you the peptides")
indicates that Wilson hears Flower's utterance as a request for
peptides. Instead of simply asking for them, Flower casts his request in
terms of the importance of the investigation. In other words, epistemological or evaluative formulations of scientific activity are being made
to do the work of social negotiation.
   A single discussion, occupying no more than a few minutes, can thus
comprise a series of complex negotiations. The contention that ACTH
and endorphin had some common relation was reinforced, Brunick's
recent claim was degraded, and work was planned to enhance the
resistance to attacks on Wilson's contention about the lack of
psychobehavioural effects of certain peptides. These, then, are the
results of just some microprocesses of fact construction which take
place continually throughout the laboratory. Indeed, the encounter
reported above is typical of hundreds of similar exchanges. In the
course of these exchanges beliefs are changed, statements are en-
1 58                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


hanced or discredited, and reputations and alliances between researchers are modified. For our present purposes, the most important
characteristic of these kinds of exchange is that they are devoid of
statements which are "objective" in the sense that they escape the
influence of negotiation between participants. Moreover, there is no
indication that such exchanges comprise a kind of reasoning process
which is markedly different from those characteristic of exchanges in
nonscientific settings. Indeed, for an observer, any presupposed
difference between the quality of "scientific" and "commonsense"
exchanges soon disappears. If, as this suggests, there are similarities
between conversational exchanges in the laboratory and those which
take place outside, it is possible that differences between scientific and
common sense activity are best characterised by features other than
differences in reasoning processes (see Ch. 6).
   One evident similarity between the scientific exchanges in the
laboratory and those taking place in a nonscientific context is their
heterogeneity. Several apparently very different preoccupations feature
in exchanges lasting no more than a few seconds. For example, the
following exchange took place between two scientists as they were
discussing the draft of a paper:

 Smith:   I should do the whole sequencing but I don't have enough time.
Wilson:   But these guys from England only put their amino acid analysis
          in their paper, that's bad manners. . . .
 Smith:   And its dangerous because there is definite variance between pig
          and ovine sequence and you cannot deduce the sequence from
          the amino acid analysis (IV , 37).

During this exchange Smith and Wilson were sitting at a table,
surrounded by drafts, protocol books, and copies of articles. Even
though they have already half drafted their paper, the data to support
their arguments are not yet available. As Smith comments, the series
of investigations necessary to obtain these data would take more
time than he could spare. The paper by English researchers which
Wilson mentioned (and to which their own paper should necessarily
refer) claims that a newly discovered substance A is merely a
component part of a known substance B. Since they found that the
amino acid analysis of substance A was identical with a portion of the
amino acid analysis of substance B (and since they had supplementary
reasons to believe that the two substances were related), the English
researchers were said to have concluded that the structure of the two
substances was the same. Wilson commented that to report the amino
The Microprocessing of Facts                                         159


acid analysis rather than the sequence was "bad manners." His
complaint was that the English researchers had made a claim for the
identification of substance A prematurely, where, he (Wilson) was
trying to establish the same identification by direct sequencing of
substance A. Smith, however, saw the issue as more than just a matter
of bad manners. His credibility was at risk because of the danger that a
future paper might advance a different structure for substance A,
which would make possible accusations that both Smith and the
English researchers had prematurely deduced the structure of substance A from its amino acid analysis. This possibility was heightened
 by participants' knowledge of past attempts to establish structures. By
 referring to the Dayhoff dictionary of peptides which he kept on his
desk, Smith could show that the structure of many substances varied
according to the particular species of animal from which peptides are
taken. Even so, when he argued that one cannot deduce the structure
from amino acid analysis, Smith was not invoking an absolute rule of
procedure. In a less risky situation, in a less stringent group, in a case
where the dictionary showed no variations, the structure could have
been deduced in this way. Since the English researchers had already
made this deduction, Wilson and Smith might have been tempted to
make the same jump. The decision whether to carry out more
experiments or simply to concur that substance A and B were identical
thus depended on various evaluations made by Wilson and Smith. For
example, whether or not sufficient time was available hinged on
Smith's evaluation of the relative importance of other tasks he had to
fulfil. The importance of independently deducing the structure depended on Smith's assessment of possible objections in future papers. 4
   These examples of conversations between scientists show that a
complex web of evaluations simultaneously enter into any one
deduction or decision. In the last example, there were evaluations of
the exigencies of professional practice, the constraints of time, the
possibility of future controversy, and the urgency of concommitant
research interests. The wealth of evaluations makes it impossible to
conceive of thought processes or reasoning procedures occurring in
isolation from the actual material setting where these conversations
took place. Let us now look more closely at the way in which different
types of preoccupation enter into exchanges between scientists.
   Any utterance can comprise one or more of a number of different
preoccupations. Thus, in any given setting, multiple interests may
simultaneously enter into any one utterance or utterances may switch
160                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


rapidly between sets of interests. For example, a series of utterances
dealing with what is known about something can suddenly be interrupted so that quite different preoccupations come into play. (Who had
done that? How good is he?) But these interests are themselves liable to
shift abruptly. (Where and what should I publish?) The next utterance
might embody yet another preoccupation. (What can we say in this
paper?) Moreover, the discussion is always likely to be disrupted by an
apparently unconnected issue. (Mike, where did you put the racks?).
   A comprehensive typology of interests entering into scientists'
discussions would be beyond the scope of the present discussion.
Nevertheless, it is possible to discern, albeit in a preliminary way, four
main kinds of conversational exchange, each of which correspond to a
set of participants' preoccupations.
   A first kind of exchange featured reference to "known facts."
Discussion of long-established facts was rare and occurred only when
this knowledge was thought relevant for contemporary debate. More
frequently, discussion about what was known concerned recently
established facts. Thus, common kinds of exchanges were: "Eh, has
someone already done that?" "Is there a paper on that method?"
"When you try this buffer what happens?" When discussion did begin
with no references to the past, however, it was not long before parties to
the exchange invoked the existence of one particular recently published paper. The following was part of a lunch time discussion:

Dieter: Is there any structural relation between MSH and Beta LPH?
 Rose:  It's well known that MSH has parts in common with Beta
        LPH. . . . [Rose went on to explain which amino acids are the
         same. Suddenly, he asked Dieter]: Would you have expected
         finding proteolytic enzymes in the synaptosome?
Dieter: Oh yes.
 Rose: Well, has it been known for a long time?
Dieter: Well yes and no . . . there is a paper by Harrison showing that
        they do not obtain (VII, 41).

The exchange began with the kind of statement one would expect
to find in a textbook (see Ch. 2). However, the assertion that something is well known was regarded by participants as both insufficient and uninteresting. Rose wanted to know how long this had
been well known. Dieter then referred to a paper containing relevant
published statements on the matter. Thus, attention was quickly
redirected from an item of knowledge itself to an assessment of its
nearness to the frontier and its place and time of publication. As a
The Microprocessing of Facts                                             161


result, the possibility of controversy ("yes and no") was raised.
Clearly, these kinds of exchanges serve an information-spreading
function which enables group members continuously to draw upon
each other's knowledge and expertise to improve their own. These
exchanges help to retrieve those practices, papers, and ideas from the
past which have become relevant to present concerns.
  A second kind of exchange occurred in the course of some practical
activity, such as carrying out an assay, when utterances such as the
following were common: "How many rats should I use for the
control?" "Where did you put the samples?" "Give me the pipette,"
and "It is now ten minutes since the injection." These are the verbal
components of a largely nonverbal body of exchanges during which
reference is constantly made to the correct way of doing things. These
exchanges take place between technicians, or between researchers and
technicians (or between researchers acting as technicians). In their
more elaborate forms, these exchanges concern the evaluation of the
reliability of a specific method. When, for example, Hills came to the
laboratory to talk over a possible collaboration in the isolation of a
certain controversial substance, he had to convince researchers of the
reliability of the bioassay he had been using. Hills presented details of
his method for an hour, during which time he was frequently interrupted by questions:

 John: You say methanol . . . is this pure methanol?
 Hills: . . . what I think is pure methanol, I don't bother further . . . we
        use the dish by the seventh day they look like normal cells. They
        do not differentiate at all and we add a new medium which
        minimizes growth.
 John: We tried that and it works well.
 Hills: That's interesting.
Wilson: Is this the ratio you get, John?
 Hills: Then when I add - - - p l u s my substance, there is no response
          at all.
  John: Is this in the same dish?
  Hills: We flip flop then and after that we will obtain the same response.
  John: Hum, that's interesting (VI, 12).

Superficially, this kind of discussion might be thought to be purely
technical. As can be shown for the above case, however, there are
always a number of undercurrents which constrain both the form and
substance of the discussion. For example, John's final expression of
interest belied his feeling that Hills's argument was entirely uncon-
162                                                      LABORATORY LIFE


vincing. John subsequently reported that he felt unable to probe Hills'
argument too severely because he knew that his boss, Wilson, was
particularly eager to collaborate with Hills. According to John, his
questions were aimed merely at eliminating some fairly obvious
objections to Hills's method. Hills's results might have arisen either
because the methanol was impure, or because the medium did not
minimize growth or because he had used the same dish. John wanted to
avoid the possibility of the laboratory's chemists being asked to
collaborate with Hills in attempting to isolate a substance which might
turn out to be an artefact. In addition, the discussion of Hills's method
proceeded with the tacit knowledge of all parties that the substance he
had been working on was the focus of a huge grant received by the
laboratory several years previously. But despite a grant of several
million dollars, their attempts to isolate the substance had so far been
unsuccessful. Indeed, according to John, there were already a dozen
published claims to have made this isolation, all of which had turned
out to be erroneous. The apparently technical discussion of Hills's
method thus comprises cautious probing informed by John's evaluation of future collaboration, by the desire to avoid working on an
artefactual substance and by the group's current investments.5
   Occasionally, a third kind of exchange took place. This kind
appeared to focus primarily on theoretical matters. By this we mean
that there was no obvious reference to the past state of knowledge, to
the relative efficacy of different techniques, or to specific scientists
and papers. This kind of exchange occurred principally between John
and Spencer:

  John:  But what you call physiologically meaningful is much larger than
         what is technically feasible now.
Spencer: But that's a healthy attitude: it's like defining criteria for neuro-
         transmitters, it defines future research: by these standards there
         is no evidence for a physiological role of TRF.
  John: Let's restate the issue . . . originally, I mean phylogenetically,
         the neurotransmitters are first; the receptors increase all over the
         place; peptides are just not that evolved: there are less receptors;
         but I see no difference with neurotransmitters (XIV, 10).

Despite the apparent concern with purely theoretical matters, the
above kind of discussion is closely related to other issues. Firstly, the
above discussion started because of prior discussion of an abstract
which Spencer had to send off that same day. In this abstract Spencer
The Microprocessing of Facts                                           163


seemed to indicate that TRF was an artefact and of no physiological
significance. Secondly, the discussion implicitly related to John's and
Spencer's concern about the future of their discipline and the direction
that work in their laboratory would take. The shift in the definition of
peptidic hormones was important for them: if peptidic hormones were
defined as neurotransmitters rather than as classic releasing factors,
other methods would have to be used, other collaborations entered into
and other research programmes set up. This discussion occurred at a
time when TRF had been found to have more and more effects similar
to neurotransmitters and was thus in the process of escaping the
boundary of the discipline. At the same time, the director of John's and
Spencer's laboratory had already shifted his research to psychobehavioural aspects of substances. If one argues that we are interpreting a theoretical discussion by overemphasising its social background and that this background had been artificially constructed, we
can answer that scientists constantly make these kinds of interpretation as part of their evaluation of research programmes.
   A fourth kind of conversational exchange featured discussion by
participants about other researchers. Sometimes this consisted of
reminiscences about who had done what in the past, usually after lunch
or in the evening when the pressure of work was relaxed. 6 More
common were discussions in which particular individuals were evaluated. This was often the case when reference was made to the
argument of a particular paper. Instead of assessing a statement itself,
participants tended to talk about its author and to account for the
statement either in terms of authors' social strategy or their psychological make-up. For example, Smith and Rickert were discussing an
abstract which they had written. In front of them were Rickert's
figures, which had been produced by a young postdoctoral researcher
working in Rickert's laboratory. Discussion focussed on the abilities of
this researcher.

 Smith:    Are you confident she would be able to do five [more animals]?
Rickert:   Her honesty?
 Smith:    Not her honesty . . . were you confident when she did the
           others . . .?
Rickert:   Oh no, at that level, she is very reliable (IV, 12).

Eventually, Smith and Rickert decided not to proceed with their
abstract because they had "more to lose than gain" by publishing
results in which they were not completely confident. One of the factors
164                                                        LABORATORY LIFE


influencing this decision was their evaluation of the personality of the
young researcher. It is not clear, however, from Smith's first utterance
whether the reliability of the data should be assessed in terms of some
personality attribute of the individual concerned. Rickert's response to
Smith's first utterance indicates his own confusion.
   This kind of reference to the human agency involved in the
production of statements was very common. Indeed, it was clear from
participants' discussions that who had made a claim was as important
as the claim itself, (see Ch. 5 ) In a sense, these discussions constituted
a complex sociology and psychology of science engaged in by
participants themselves. The following excerpts provide further examples of the ways in which participants' own sociology of science is
used as a resource in making decisions and evaluating statements:

I am not particularly anxious to do a grand study with her because she
is . . . because of her supercompetitiveness. We will be last on her paper,
well twelfth out of fifteen [laughter] (IV, 92).

This occurred during part of a discussion between two participants
about whether or not to carry out a particular experiment. The decision
to do the work clearly involved an assessment of the kind of strategy
likely to be adopted by a collaborator:

They don't know their business. It may be that they see progesterone which
has been known for years to be analgesic . . . also, there is a flag in all that.
The English have discovered that, they push it. That's normal (VII, 42.).

In a similar way, the above criticism (of a statement made by some
English researchers) involves comments about their handling of a
discovery.
   Although it is possible tentatively to distinguish the above four kinds
of conversational exchange, it is also clear that many discussions
comprised constant switches from one subject to another. For example,
in the course of one discussion (which is too long to reproduce in full), a
participant who had just returned from a conference commented that
Green had "made an ass of himself." He immediately linked this
personal attack to the agnostic statement that "Green is still talking
about new, more potent peptides." The speaker then switched to a
discussion of techniques in which he related his meeting with Green's
chemist:
The Microprocessing of Facts                                                 165


According to my four hours in the laboratory . . . I was not impressed . . .
judging by the published work it is even more embarrassing. . . . Xala
[Green's chemist] is Green's Achilles's heel (X, 1).

  Thus, in the course of one short discussion references are made to
subject matter, to personalities, to claims made at a conference, to
techniques used in another laboratory, and to competitors' past
claims. After a slight pause, the same speaker added:

So far it is going to change very rapidly, we are the only ones to have
antibodies for this substance . . . we seemed to be the only ones doing
meaningful work (X, 10).

In this short addition, the speaker links a material element of the
laboratory (antibodies) both to the agonistic field and to his own work.
  The same excerpt further shows the multitude of interests which
enter into discussions, once the two other participants began to talk:

A: We have an interesting thing for you . . . we gave a single dose of B;
   killed the animals by microwave . . . of course we have some controls
   without any injection
B: Hum, hum.
A: and we assay them for Beta and Alpha.
B: The whole brain?
A: Yes, and our big surprise was that two and a half hours later
B: [writing carefully] Two and a half hours. . . .
A: it was still 40% the value of Beta . . . the values are here [pointing out a
   scribbled sheet of paper]. . . .
B: Now this is unbelievable!
A: Of course, the Beta assay is not perfect but we can trust. . . .
B: I think in this case the misreading of Beta cannot be important. . . .
A: No, no, I think
B: [looking at the sheet] Is this point statistically different?
A: Oh yes, I have done it . . . anyway it is different from the control. . . .
B: What is the control?
A: The control is a brain extracted in the same way . . . but we may say
   something, in the control there is 25 times more Beta than Alpha.
B: That much is already getting interesting.
A: The value is. . . .
B: It's too late to send an abstract to the Federations?! (X, 20).

This exchange took place as participants were looking at a number of
data sheets. Expressions such as "this is unbelievable" and "big
surprise" stemmed from the expectation that the peptide Beta would
166                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


degradate quickly and from the contrary indication of the data. B's use
of the word "interesting" towards the end of the extract can be
understood against a background of controversy over whether either of
Beta or Alpha are artefacts. Each of B's questions anticipated a basic
objection to the results of the assay. The ability to answer or anticipate
these questions depended entirely on the local setting. In other words,
it was possible that the assay was unreliable; or that readings resulted
from the presence of some other substance. Parties to the exchange
thus engaged in manipulating their figures, considering possible
objections, assessing their interpretation of statements, and evaluating
the reliability of different claims. All the time they were ready to dart to
a paper and to use its arguments in an effort not to fall prey to some
basic objection to their argument. Their logic was not that of
intellectual deduction. Rather, it was the craft practice of a group of
discussants attempting to eliminate as many alternatives as they could
envisage. By virtue of these microprocesses they attempted to force a
statement in one particular direction. In the above case, the notion
thought to explain the obtained results (the so-called uptake theory)
lasted only three days. Subsequently, the results mentioned by B were
explained as having arisen from an artefactual effect.
   The comprehensive analysis of all conversations noted in the course
of our enquiry would go far beyond the scope of our present argument.
It is clear, however, that conversations between practising scientists
provide a potentially fruitful source of data which has thus far been
largely neglected in studies of scientific practice. Let us therefore
summarise some of the opportunities which this material affords.
Firstly, conversational material exhibits quite clearly how a myriad of
different types of interests and preoccupations are intermeshed in
scientists' discussions (Fig. 4.1). Secondly, we have presented evidence to indicate the extreme difficulty of identifying purely descriptive, technical, or theoretical discussions. Scientists constantly switch
between interests within the same discussion. Furthermore, their
discussions can only be explained in the context of the interests that
inform their exchanges. Thirdly, we have suggested that the mysterious thought process employed by scientists in their setting is not
strikingly different from those techniques employed to muddle through
in daily life encounters. Of course, much more detailed argument is
needed to sustain this point satisfactorily. For now, we shall merely
suggest that the encounters we have described can be adequately
accounted for using the notion of fact construction, and that this makes
unnecessary the use of ad hoc epistemological explanations.
Figure 4.1
This diagram represents the different preoccupations of the conversations we observed in the laboratory. Any utterance can be situated at
the middle of the intersecting lines and is susceptible to switch abruptly
to any set of preoccupations indicated here. The main sets are the
already constructed facts (stage 4 or 5), the individual makers of these
facts, the set of assertions in the process of fabrication (stages 1 to 3),
and, lastly, the body of practices and inscription devices allowing
operations to be performed. Any utterance is thus the integration of
these many evaluations. It is in this sense we can say that a scientific
assertion is socially constructed.


                                                                       167
168                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


The Sociological Analysis of "Thought Processes"
   Unlike many of the written records of the laboratory, informal
discussions provide material which has neither been corrected nor
formalised. It is perhaps not surprising that such material provides a
wealth of evidence of the intrusion of social factors in the day-to-day
exchanges between scientists. But is it possible now to extend the
analysis to the realm of thought itself? We have tried to persuade the
reader to follow our move from macrosociological concerns to a study
of the laboratory and from there to the microsociological study of a
single fact. In the previous section we examined how fact construction
is affected by conversational exchanges. But the analysis of thought is
surely beyond the scope of sociological investigation! It could be
argued, for example, that the solitude of the individual scientist in
thought excludes the sociologist by definition. Social factors are selfevidently absent from the activity of thought. In addition, it would be
argued, the sociological observer is prevented from demonstrating the
social character of thought because he is unable to present any written
record of thought processes.7
   Although it might seem wiser to stop sociological enquiry at the
level of mute individual thought and to leave the ground to psychology
(Mitroff, 1974), psychoanalysis, or to scientists' reminiscences (Lacan,
1966), this would be inconsistent with our argument so far. If we
cannot account in sociological terms for scientists' thoughts the ad hoc
concepts of which we have tried to rid ourselves will merely take refuge
in the "intimate thought process." As a result, science will once again
appear extraordinary. Our position is not unlike the opponents of
vitalism in nineteenth-century biology. No matter what progress was
made by biologists to explain life in purely mechanistic and materialist
terms, some aspects always remained unexplained. There were always
some corners in which notions of "soul" or the "pure vital force" could
find refuge. Similarly, the notion that there is something special about
science, something peculiar or mysterious which materialist and
constructivist explanations can never grasp, is pushed further and
further. But this notion will remain as long as the idea lingers that there
is some peculiar thinking process in the scientist's mind. It is to
complete our argument and to hamstring efforts to rescue the exotic
view of science that we need tentatively to embark upon this new level
of microprocessing.
   We have already said that a major obstacle to the study of thought
processes is the absence of written records. The situation is fortunately
The Microprocessing of Facts                                              169


more complicated than that, as can be seen from the following account,
provided by a member of a nearby laboratory:

Slovik proposed an assay but his assay did not work everywhere; people
could not repeat it; some could, some could not. Then one day Slovik got the
idea that it could be related to the selenium content in the water: they
checked to see where the assay worked; and indeed, Slovik's idea was right,
it worked wherever the selenium content of water was high (XII, 2).

Clearly, this account is amenable to the kind of treatment found in
biblical exegesis (Bultmann, 1921). It is an anecdote of the type "one
day so and so had an idea," which, as historians of science well know,
is common among the recollections of scientists. The observation that
it is an anecdote has an important consequence. Instead of marvelling
at how Slovik could have such a good idea and how he could be so
damned right, it is possible to formulate an alternative account using
sociological arguments based on interview material. This kind of
account takes the following form: Firstly, because of an institutional
(University of California) requirement that graduate students were
obliged to obtain credits in a field totally unrelated to their own, one of
Slovik's young students, Sara, had taken selenium studies. She had
opted for this because it had a vague relation to her major option.
Secondly, there had been a strong group tradition that informal
seminars be held where graduate students were asked to talk about
unrelated areas in which they had obtained extra credits. Thirdly, at
one meeting Sara had presented a paper on selenium dealing both with
tissues of interest to her fellow immunologists and with more unrelated
questions, such as the influence of selenium water content on cancer.
Slovik was at this meeting. A few years earlier he had proposed a cell
culture assay, which nobody could reproduce at first, but which was
subsequently found to work in some places but not others. The
dependence of the efficacy of the assay on geographical location was
baffling, mainly because of the prevalent working assumption that
scientific principles held universally true. Even Slovik's technician
found himself unable to make the assay work outside of his own
laboratory. It was not until all the necessary materials and equipment
were transported from Slovik's laboratory that the assay was found to
work. But even this successful attempt to reproduce identical conditions outside Slovik's laboratory did not reveal that the water was the
critical factor. Previously, attempts to repeat Slovik's assays had
failed, apparently because of the nature of the cells used by other
investigators.
1 70                                                LABORATORY LIFE


   Sara mentioned at the end of her presentation that someone on
campus had recently suggested that a trace amount of selenium in
water can cause some forms of cancer. The suggestion was that there
was a coincidence between the geographical distribution of selenium
content in water throughout the U.S. and the occurrence of certain
types of cancer. Sara said that no one had taken this suggestion
seriously. But Slovik took up the notion that the distribution of
selenium content in water could explain the selective occurrence of a
particular phenomenon at certain locations.8 His assays only worked
"in some places." It was therefore possible that high selenium content
corresponded to locations where the assay would not work. Slovik
made a hurried telephone call to one of his colleagues who had been
unsuccessful in making the assay work: "Listen, I've got an idea. Sara
suggested that it might be the selenium in the water. Can you check
that?"
   Although this second account is as much a constructed tale as the
first, there are some notable differences. The main character of the first
is Slovik; the second features a graduate student, Slovik, and the
perpetrator of the suggested link between selenium content and cancer.
The first account focusses on sudden realisation; the second portrays a
multiple progression of accidentally related events. The first highlight's an individual's idea, whereas the second mentions institutional
requirements, group traditions, seminar meetings, suggestions, discussions and so on. More significantly, the first account is included as
part of the second.
   Slovik told his colleagues that he had got an idea. Clearly, the
attribution of credit for the idea depends to a large extent on which
particular version is taken as authoritative. Can the idea be truly said
to have first occurred to Slovik rather than to Sara? We shall return to a
discussion of actors' appropriation of ideas in the next chapter. For
present purposes, it is important to note that having an idea (as in the
first account) represents a summary of a complicated material
situation. Once the connection between selenium content and the
assay was made, all the attendant social circumstances disappeared.
By transforming the second account into the first, the teller transforms
a localised, heteregoneous, and material set of circumstances (in
which social factors are clearly visible) into the sudden occurrence of a
personal and abstract idea which bears no trace of its social construction.9
The Microprocessing of Facts                                               1 71


   This example suggests that there may not be any thought process
which should be studied by sociologists or psychologists. By this we
mean to suggest that individual's ideas and thought processes result
from a particular form of presentation and simplication of a whole set
of material and collective circumstances. If the observer takes such
anecdotes at face value, it will be hard to demonstrate the social
character of fact construction. If, however, he treats them as tales
which obey certain laws of their "genre," it is possible both to extend
the analysis of fact construction and to understand how such stories
about ideas and thought are generated. 10
   The above example encourages us to try sociologically to understand what is all too frequently transformed into stories about minds
having ideas. A useful maxim is Heidegger's observation that "Gedanke
ist Handwerk": thinking is craftwork. An unusually explicit example
of the importance of craftwork is related in Watson's (1968) account
of the famous Donohue episode. Watson's portrayal of his "pretty
model," in which bases are paired along a like-with-like structure,
does not situate himself in a realm of thought, but inside a real
Cambridge office manipulating physically real cardboard models of
the bases. He does not report having had ideas, but instead emphasises
that he shared an office with Jerry Donohue. When Donohue objected
to Watson's choice of the enol form for picturing the bases, Watson
pointed to actual textbooks of chemistry.

  My immediate retort that several other texts also pictured guanine and
  thymine in the enol form cut no ice with Jerry. Happily, he let out that for
  years chemists had been arbitrarily favoring particular tautomerie forms
  over their alternatives on only the flimsiest of grounds (Watson, 1968:
  120)

Watson chose to believe Donohue rather than the general opinion
expressed in the textbooks for a variety of reasons, not least of which
was his evaluation of Donohue's career up to that date. 11 As we shall
see in Chapter 5, individuals' careers constitute an important resource
for evaluation of their claims. On the basis of his evaluation, Watson
cut out new cardboard models of bases and, after moving them about
his desk for a while, he saw the symmetry of the cardboard models of
the pairs thymine and guanine and adenine and cytosine. If Watson
had not written his book, no doubt the complexity of this practice
would have been transformed, either into an anecdote that "one day
172                                                          LABORATORY LIFE


Watson got the idea of trying the keto form" or into a titanic
epistemological battle between rival theories.
   A major difficulty for the observer is that he usually arrives on the
scene too late; he can only record the retrospective anecdotes of how
this or that scientist had an idea. This difficulty can be partially
overcome by in situ observation both of the construction of a new
statement and of the subsequent emergence of anecdotes about its
formation. Let us give an example.
   In the laboratory, Spencer had been working on neurotensin,
substance P, and on analogs of these two peptides. He tried these
peptides in several behavioural assays but did not seem very happy
with the results. One outcome of this programme, however, was that
one analog of substance P, bombesin, seemed closely to match the
effects of neurotensin. This was despite the fact that bombesin was
totally unrelated to the structure of neurotensin. Some time later,
considerable excitement accompanied Spencer's production of a
diagram purporting to show the substantial effect of bombesin on the
temperature of rats exposed to cold. The unexpected size of this effect
attracted much comment in the laboratory. Although bombesin was
active in other assays in quantities of a few micrograms, no more than a
nanogram was needed to decrease temperature. Members of the
laboratory heralded this as a new finding. When asked why he had
tried bombesin in an assay which had never previously been used in the
laboratory, Spencer replied:

I have been sitting for a long time waiting for someone with a good CNS
assay. . . . I tried a lot of things . . . you remember, I tried temperature, tail
vibration. I was never satisfied. . . . But temperature that's important. . . .
It's easily measureable and directly related to CNS effect . . . Then this
paper came by Bis. . . . I really wanted a CNS assay (IX, 68).

The paper written by Bis described the effect of neurotensin on the
temperature of rats exposed to cold. On the basis of earlier trials,
Spencer knew that bombesin was functionally (but not structurally)
related to neurotensin. Consequently, it occurred to Spencer that it
might be worth trying out the possibility of a similar effect of bombesin
on temperature. Thus, his existing concern with bombesin and his
perception of an analogy between the effects of neurotensin and
bombesin together prompted him to try out a new effect. 12 As it
happened, bombesin was shown to be 100,000 times more active than
neurotensin.
The Microprocessing of Facts                                       173


  In the article subsequently sent to Science, the link between
bombesin and neutotensin was no longer analogical. Instead, it had
apparently been deduced from the importance of bombesin on the
central nervous system. But, as we have seen above, this importance
was the consequence of the experiment rather than its prior justification. When asked two months later how the link between bombesin and
body temperature had been made, Spencer explained that it was a
"logical idea . . . it was straightforward, knowing the importance of
thermoregulation for frogs" [from which bombesin was originally
isolated].
   The significance of this example stems not so much from the fact
that Spencer modified his account of the discovery over time (Woolgar, 1976; Knorr, 1978), but from the nature of this modification.
Initially, the link between bombesin and thermoregulation was weak.
The local circumstances of the laboratory made it only a small step
between one entity and another. After a while, however, the link
became transformed into a strong logical connection. At the same
time, the step taken by Spencer appears to have become very large.
   The pervasive influence of analogical reasoning will be evident to
many observers of scientific activity. Indeed, there exists an extensive
literature on the nature of analogy in science (for example, Hesse,
1966; Black, 1961; Mulkay, 1974; Edge, 1966; Leatherdale, 1974).
These authors have discussed the kinds of hybridisation process
through which new statements are formed and have thereby helped
expose the meticulous sorting of weak connections between existing
ideas which constitutes the otherwise mysterious act of creation. It has
been pointed out that logical connections of the form "A is B" are only
one part of a family of analogical connections, such as "A is like B,"
"A reminds me of B," and "A might be B." Such analogical links have
proved particularly fruitful in science even though they are logically
imprecise. For example, the syllogism corresponding to the situation
described above would take the following form:

   Bombesin sometimes acts like neurotensin.
   Neurotensin decreases temperature.
  Therefore bombesin decreases temperature.

Clearly, this is logically incorrect. Nevertheless, it was sufficient to
prompt an investigation which yielded results subsequently acclaimed
as an outstanding contribution. 13 Once the new statement has been
174                                                LABORATORY LIFE


accepted, the initial premises are modified (through representation in a
written or other retrospective account) to make the syllogism formally
correct (Bloor, 1976).
   Our point is that the kind of work done by scientists and frequently
depicted as analogical reasoning is not reasoning. Spencer wanted to
carry out a successful assay, he had bombesin in the laboratory and he
wanted to make something out of it. He had accumulated data on the
similarity of bombesin and neurotensin, he read Bis's paper, and he
adopted the assay described by Bis. By reconstructing the material
setting, circumstances, and chance encounters, it becomes clear that
the decision to try out the effects of bombesin on temperature was a very
small step, and far from the audacious logical leap which it was later
depicted to be. Precisely because the local circumstances change very
quickly, all reference to them disappears once the step has been made.
Both participant and observer are soon left with a version of the event
which has been eroded of all contingent circumstances. Retrospectively, the two entities (practices or statements) appear unrelated.
Consequently, any link between them will appear "Outstanding."
   We have argued that accounts of the emergence of a new finding (or
statement of fact) entail a two-fold process of transformation. On the
one hand, the analogical path is often replaced by a logical connection.
On the other hand, the complex set of local circumstances which
temporarily makes possible a weak link gives way to flashes of
intuition. The notion of someone having had an idea provides a highly
condensed summary of a complex series of processes. It also forms the
basis for an account which begins to come to terms with the essential
contradiction between the use by scientists of procedures which are
logical (but sterile) and yet fruitful (but logically incorrect). Our
argument is not simply that thought processes are readily amenable to
sociological study; rather, an important focus of study should be the
aspects of scientists' accounting practices through which thought
processes are created and sustained.

Facts and Artefacts
   The paradox associated with the term fact was spelled out in
Chapter 2: fact can have two contradictory meanings. On the one
hand, our quasi-anthropological perspective stresses its etymological
significance: a fact is derived from the root facere, factum (to make or
to do). On the other hand, fact is taken to refer to some objectively
The Microprocessing of Facts                                             175


independent entity which, by reason of its "out there-ness" cannot be
modified at will and is not susceptible to change under any circumstances. The tension between the existence of knowledge as pregiven
and its creation by actors has long been a theme which has preoccupied
philosophers (Bachelard, 1953) and sociologists of knowledge. Some
sociologists have attempted a synthesis of the two perspectives (for
example, Berger and Luckman, 1971), but usually with somewhat
unsatisfactory results. More recently, sociologists of science have
convincingly argued the case for the social fabrication of science (for
example, Bloor, 1976; Collins, 1975;Knorr, 1978). But despite these
arguments, facts refuse to become sociologised. They seem able to
return to their state of being "out there" and thus to pass beyond the
grasp of sociological analysis. In a similar way, our demonstration of
the microprocessing of facts is likely to be a source of only temporary
persuasion that facts are constructed. Readers, especially practising
scientists, are unlikely to adopt this perspective for very long before
returning to the notion that facts exist, and that it is their existence that
requires skillfull revelation. 14 In the last part of this chapter, therefore,
we discuss the source of this resistance to sociological explanation. It
is little use arguing the feasibility of the strong programme of the
sociology of knowledge if we cannot understand why it seems systematically absurd to make such an argument. As Kant (1950) advised, it
is not enough merely to show that something is an illusion. We also
need to understand why the illusion is necessary.
   In the case of TRF, we showed when and where the metamorphosis
between statement and fact took place. By the end of 1969, when
Guillemin and Schally formulated the statement that TRF is Pyro-GluHis-Pro-NH2, no one was able to raise any further objections to this
claim. Laboratories with no interest in the nine-year saga of the
emergence of TRF proceeded from this statement merely by citing
papers published at the end of 1969. For them the statement was
sufficient basis on which to place an order for the synthetic material
which promised to decrease the noise of the assays in which they were
engaged. From the point of view of the borrowers, the traces of
production of the established fact were uninteresting and irrelevant.
Five years later, even the names of the "discoverers" of TRF were of
no consequence (cf., Fig. 3.2).
   We have been careful to point out that our determination of the point
of stabilisation, when a statement rids itself of all determinants of place
and time and of all reference to its producers and the production
1 76                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


 process, did not depend on our assumption that the "real TRF" was
 merely waiting to be discovered and that it finally became visible in
  1969. TRF might yet turn out to be an artefact. For example, no
 arguments have yet been advanced which are accepted as proof that
 TRF is present in the body as Pyro-Glu-His-Pro in "physiologically
 significant" amounts. Although it is accepted that synthetic Pyro-Glu-
 His-Pro is active in assays, it has not yet been possible to measure it in
 the body. The negative findings of attempts to establish the physio-
 logical significance of TRF have thus far been attributed to the
 insensitivity of the assays being used rather than to the possibility that
 TRF is an artefact. But some further slight change in context may yet
 favour the selection of an alternative interpretation and the realisation
 of this latter possibility. The point at which stabilisation occurs
 depends on prevailing conditions within a particular context. It is
 characteristic of the process of fact construction that stabilisation
 entails the escape of a statement from all reference to the process of
 construction.
    Facts and artefacts do not correspond respectively to true and false
 statements. Rather, statements lie along a continuum according to the
 extent to which they refer to the conditions of their construction. Up to
 a certain point on this continuum, the inclusion of reference to the
 conditions of construction is necessary for purposes of persuasion.
 Beyond this point, the conditions of construction are either irrelevant
 or their inclusion can be seen as an attempt to undermine the established
 fact-like status of the statement. Our argument is not that facts are not
 real, nor that they are merely artificial. Our argument is not just that
facts are socially constructed. We also wish to show that the process
 of construction involves the use of certain devices whereby all traces
 of production are made extremely difficult to detect. Let us look more
 closely at what takes place at the point of stabilisation.
    From their initial inception members of the laboratory are unable to
determine whether statements are true or false, objective or subjective,
highly likely or quite probable. While the agonistic process is raging,
modalities are constantly added, dropped, inverted, or modified. Once
the statement begins to stabilise, however, an important change takes
place. The statement becomes a split entity. On the one hand, it is a set
of words which represents a statement about an object. On the other
hand, it corresponds to an object in itself which takes on a life of its
own. It is as if the original statement had projected a virtual image of
itself which exists outside the statement (Latour, 1978). Previously,
scientists were dealing with statements. At the point of stabilisation,
The Microprocessing of Facts                                         177


however, there appears to be both objects and statements about these
objects. Before long, more and more reality is attributed to the object
and less and less to the statement about the object. Consequently, an
inversion take place: the object becomes the reason why the statement
was formulated in the first place. At the onset of stabilisation, the
object was the virtual image of the statement; subsequently, the
statement becomes the mirror image of the reality "out there." Thus
the justification for the statement TRF is Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2 is
simply that "TRF really is Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2." At the same time,
the past becomes inverted. TRF has been there all along, just waiting
to be revealed for all to see. The history of its construction is also
transformed from this new vantage point: the process of construction is
turned into the pursuit of a single path which led inevitably to the
"actual" structure. Only through the skills and efforts of "great"
scientists could the setbacks of red herrings and blind alleys be
overcome and the real structure be revealed for what it was.
    Once splitting and inversion have occurred, even the most cynical
observers and committed relativists will have difficulty in resisting the
impression that the "real" TRF has been found, and that the statement
mirrors reality. The further temptation for the observer, once faced
with one set of statements and one reality to which these statements
correspond, is to marvel at the perfect match between the scientist's
statement and the external reality. 15 Since wonder is the mother of
philosophy, it is even possible that the observer will begin to invent all
kinds of fantastic systems to account for this miraculous adequatìo rei
et intellectus. To counter this possibility, we offer our observations of
the way this kind of illusion is constructed within the laboratory. It is
small wonder that the statements appear to match external entities so
exactly: they are the same thing.
   Our contention is that the strength of correspondence between
objects and statements about these objects stems from the splitting
and inversion of a statement within the laboratory context. This
contention can be supported in three ways. Firstly, there are severe
difficulties in adequately describing the nature of the "out there-ness"
in which objects are said to reside because descriptions of scientific
reality frequently comprise a reformulation or restatement of the
statement which purports to "be about" this reality. For example, it is
said that TRF is Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2. But the further description of
the nature of the TRF "out there" hinges on the repetition of this
statement and so involves tautology. Lest the reader thinks this is an
178                                                       LABORATORY LIFE


unwarranted caricature of the realist position, it is worth quoting from
an argument for a "realist theory of science." In essence, the position
advocated here is that no theory of science is possible without what are
referred to as "intransitive objects of scientific knowledge."

  We can easily imagine a world similar to ours, containing the same
  intransitive objects of scientific knowledge, but without any science to
  produce knowledge of them. . . . In such a world, which has occurred
  and may come again, reality would be unspoken for and yet things would
  not cease to act and interact in all kinds of ways. In such a world . . . the
  tides would still turn and metals conduct electricity in the way that they
  do, without a Newton or a Drude to produce our knowledge of them. The
  Widemann-Franz law would continue to hold although there would be
  no-one to formulate, experimentally establish or deduce it. Two atoms
  of hydrogen would continue to combine with one atom of oxygen and in
  favourable circumstances osmosis would continue to occur (Bhaskar,
  1975: 10).

The author adds that these intransitive objects are "quite independent
of us" (p. 21). He then continues with a striking confession: "They are
not unknowable, because, as a matter of fact, quite a bit is known about
them" (p. 22). Quite a bit indeed! The marvel of the author for the
independence of reality belies its initial construction. Moreover, the
ontological status accorded these independent objects is enhanced by
the vague terms in which they are described. For example, the
statement that "metals conduct electricity in the way they do" implies
a complexity beyond the scope of present discussion and, by implication, available only to concerted efforts toward the pursuit and
revelation of the reality which gives rise to the description provided
here. 16 The author can only recall the reality of the Widemann-Franz
laws through the use of eponymy. In addition, he wisely confines his
discussion to physics, and to pre-Newtonian physics at that. Perhaps
the "independence" of "intransitive objects of scientific knowledge"
would seem less unproblematic in relation to more recently constructed phenomena, such as chromosomes or non-Newtonian physics. The realist position, exemplified by the above, centres on a
tautological belief whereby the nature of independent objects can only
be described in the terms which constitute them. Our preference is for
the observation of the processes of splitting and inversion of statements which make these kinds of beliefs possible.
The Microprocessing of Facts                                                179


   Scientists themselves constantly raise questions as to whether a
particular statement "actually" relates to something "out there," or
whether it is a mere figment of the imagination, or an artefact of the
procedures employed. It is therefore unrealistic to portray scientists
busily occupying themselves with scientific activity while leaving
debates between realism and relativism to the philosophers. Depending
on the argument, the laboratory, the time of year, and the currency of
controversy, investigators will variously take the stand of realist,
relativist, idealist, transcendental relativist, sceptic, and so on. In
other words, the debate about the paradox of the fact is not the
exclusive privilege of the sociologist or philosopher. It follows that
attempts to resolve the essential differences between these positions is
merely to engage in the same kind of debates as the subjects of study,
rather than to understand how debates get resolved and positions taken
as practical and temporary achievements. As Marx (1970) put it:

   [T]he question of knowing if human thought is able to reach an objective
   truth is not a theoretical but a practical question. It is by practice that
   man ought to prove the truth, that is, the reality and the power of the
   something beyond his thought.

An important task for the sociologist is to show that the construction of
reality should not be itself reified. This can be shown by considering all
stages of the process of reality construction and by resisting the
temptation to provide a general explanation for the phenomenon.
    Perhaps the most forceful argument for the occurrence of splitting
and inversion is the existence of artefacts. A modification in the local
context of the laboratory may result in the use of a modality whereby
an accepted statement becomes qualified or doubted. This yields
perhaps the most fascinating observation to be made in the laboratory-the    deconstruction of reality. The reality "out there" once again
melts back into a statement, the conditions of production of which are
again made explicit. We have already given a number of examples of
this deconstruction process (see for example p. 129ff). The existence of
a moiety for TRF was taken as fact for a few years and was almost
regarded as reality before it faded away and was found to be an artefact
of the purification process. Sometimes the status of statements
changed from day to day, even from one hour to the next. The factual
status of one substance, for instance, varied dramatically over a period
of a few days. 17 On Tuesday, a peak was thought to be the sign of a real
180                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


substance. But on Wednesday the peak was regarded as resulting from
an unreliable physiograph. On Thursday, the use of another pool of
extracts gave rise to another peak which was taken to be "the same."
At this point, the existence of a new object was slowly solidifying,
only to be dissolved again the following day. At the frontier of science,
statements are constantly manifesting a double potential: they are
either accounted for in terms of local causes (subjectivity or artefact)
or are referred to as a thing "out there" (objectivity and fact).
   While one set of agonistic forces pushes statement towards fact-like
status, another set pushes it toward artefact-like status. This is
exemplified by the kind of exchange quoted at the beginning of the
chapter. The local status of a statement at any time depends on the
resultant of these forces (Fig.4.2). The construction and dismantling
of the same statement can be monitored by direct observation, so that
what was a "thing out there" can be seen to fold back into a statement
which is referred to as a "mere string of words," a "fiction," or an
"artefact" (Latour, 1978). The importance of observing the transformation of a statement between fact-like and artefact-like status is
obvious: if the "truth effect" of science can be shown both to fold and
unfold, it becomes much more difficult to argue that the difference
between a fact and and artefact is that the former is based on reality
while the latter merely arises from local circumstances and psychological conditions. The distinction between reality and local circumstances exists only after the statement has stabilised as a fact.
   To summarize the argument in another way, "reality" cannot be
used to explain why a statement becomes a fact, since it is only after it
has become a fact that the effect of reality is obtained. This is the case
whether the reality effect is cast in terms of "objectivity" or "out thereness." It is because the controversy settles, that a statement splits into
an entity and a statement about an entity; such a split never precedes
the resolution of controversy. Of course, this will appear trivial to a
scientist working on a controversial statement. After all, he does not
wait in hope that TRF will pop up at a meeting and finally settle the
controversy as to which amino acids it comprises. In this work,
therefore, we use the argument as a methodological precaution. Like
scientists themselves we do not use the notion of reality to account for
the stabilisation of a statement (see Ch. 3), because this reality is
formed as a consequence of this stabilisation. 18
   We do not wish to say that facts do not exist nor that there is no such
thing as reality. In this simple sense our position is not relativist. Our
Figure 4.2
If it is assumed that the name of the scientific game is to push a
statement (A.B) as far as possible toward fact-like status (stages 4 and
5), then, depending on the resistance encountered (in the form of
efforts to transform the statement into an artefact), a scientist has to
modify his statement until he can push it to stage 5. The hypothetical
example here illustrates the double movement of push and jump. If
resistance is too severe, a new statement is forged by an analogical
jump and pushed again into the agonistic field. The resultant of this
double movement is a drift which follows a pattern peculiar to each
statement.




                                                                     181
182                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


point is that "out-there-ness" is the consequence of scientific work
rather than its cause. We therefore wish to stress the importance of
timing. By considering TRF in January 1968, it would be easy to show
that TRF is a contingent social construction, and moreover, that
scientists themselves are relativists in that they are very aware of the
possibility of their constructing a reality which could be an artefact. On
the other hand, analysis in January 1970 would reveal TRF as an
object of nature which had been discovered by scientists, who, in the
meantime, had metamorphosed into hardened realists. Once the
controversy has settled, reality is taken to be the cause of this
settlement; but while controversy is still raging, reality is the consequence of debate, following each twist and turn in the controversy as if
it were the shadow of scientific endeavour.19
   It could be objected that there are other grounds for accepting the
reality of a fact apart from the cessation of controversy. For example,
it could be argued that the efficacy of a scientific statement outside the
laboratory is sufficient basis for accepting its correspondence with
reality.20 A fact is a fact, one could say, because it works when you
apply it outside science. This objection can be answered in the same
way as the objection about the equivalence of a statement with the
thing out there: observation of laboratory activity shows that the
"outside" character of a fact is itself the consequence of the laboratory
work. In no instance did we observe the independent verification of a
statement produced in the laboratory. Instead, we observed the
extension of some laboratory practices to other arenas of social
reality, such as hospitals and industry.
    This observation would be of little weight if the laboratory was
concerned exclusively with so-called basic science. However, our
laboratory had many connections with clinicians and with industry
through patents.21 Let us consider one particular statement: "somatostatin blocks the release of growth hormones as measured by radioimmunoassay." If we ask whether this statement works outside
science, the answer is that the statement holds in every place where the
radioimmunoassay has been reliably 22 set up. This does not imply that
the statement holds true everywhere, even where the radioimmuno-
 assay has not been set up. If one takes a blood sample of a hospital
 patient in order to determine whether or not somatostatin lowers the
 level of the patient's growth hormone, there is no way of answering this
question without access to a radioimmunoassay for somatostatin. One
can believe that somatostatin has this effect and even claim by
The Microprocessing of Facts                                        183


induction that the statement holds true absolutely, but this amounts to
a belief and a claim, rather than to a proof.23 Proof of the statement
necessitates the extension of the network in which the radioimmunoassay is valid, to make part of the hospital ward into a laboratory annex
in order to set up the same assay. It is impossible to prove that a given
statement is verified outside the laboratory since the very existence of
the statement depends on the context of the laboratory. We are not
arguing that somatostatin does not exist, nor that it does not work, but
that it cannot jump out of the very network of social practice which
makes possible its existence.
   There is nothing especially mysterious about the paradoxical nature
of facts. Facts are constructed in such a way that, once the controversy
settles, they are taken for granted. The origin of the paradox is in the
lack of observation of scientific practices; when an observer considers
that the structure of TRF is Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2 and then realises
that the 'real' TRF is also Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2, he marvels at this
magnificent example of correspondence between man's mind and
nature. But closer inspection of the processes of production reveals
this correspondence to be much more earthy and less mysterious: the
thing and the statement correspond for the simple reason that they
come from the same source. Their separation is only the final stage in
the process of their construction. Similarly, many scientists and nonscientists alike, marvel at the efficacy of a scientific fact outside
science. How extraordinary that a peptidic structure discovered in
California works in the smallest hospital in Saudia Arabia! For one
thing, it only works in well-equipped clinical laboratories. Considering
that the same set of operations produces the same answers, there is
little to marvel at (Spinoza, 1677): if you carry out the same assay you
will produce the same object.24
   By this introduction to the microprocessess of the fact production,
we have tried to show that a close inspection of laboratory life provides
a useful means of tackling problems usually taken up by epistemologists; that the analysis of these microprocesses does not in any way
require the a priori acceptance of any special character of scientific
activity; and finally that it is important to eschew arguments about the
external reality and outside efficacy of scientific products to account
for the stabilisation of facts, because such reality and efficacy are the
consequence rather than the cause of scientific activity.
184                                                              LABORATORY LIFE


                                     NOTES
      1. In this chapter we use only a small fraction of the material bearing upon
microprocesses. Our intention is merely to provide an overview of the work of the
laboratory. To do this we have had somewhat to simplify the analysis of conversations
and accounts. A full analysis, particularly one that aspired to the rigour of "conversational analysis" (for example, Sacks, 1972; Sacks et al., 1974), would demand much
more detailed treatment than given here.
      2. The problem of indexicality in science has already enjoyed limited attention.
Barnes and Law (1976), for example, have argued that none of the expressions used by
scientists can escape indexicality. The implication is that scientific expressions are no
better able to yield a determinacy of meaning than any employed in "nonscientific"
or common sense contexts. Garfinkel's (1967) discussion can also be read as
supporting this conclusion. In a related manner, a number of continental semioticians
have recently begun to extend the tools of literary analysis to the study of rhetoric in a
wide number of areas: poetry, advertisements, lawyers' pleas, and science (Greimas,
 1976; Bastide, forthcoming; Latour and Fabbri, 1977). For semioticians, science is a
form of fiction or discourse like any other (Foucault, 1966), one effect of which is the
"truth effect," which (like all other literary effects) arises from textual characteristics,
such as the tense of verbs, the structure of enunciation, modalities, and so on. Despite
the enormous difference between Anglo-Saxon studies of the ways in which indexicality
is repaired and continental semiotics, they hold in common the position that scientific
discourse has no privileged status. Science is characterised neither by an ability to
escape indexicality, nor by an absence of rhetorical or persuasive devices.
      3. This phenomenon was observed many times in the study. It does not imply that
papers are prejudiced or that there is widespread tampering with data. Rather it
demonstrates, as we suggested in Chapter 2, that papers are operations in a field which
are loaded so as to make the operations more effective. The relation between data and
points is analogous to the relation between ammunition and targets. This is why there is
no reason why papers should be an accurate reflection of the research activity of the
laboratory (Medawar, 1964; Knorr, forthcoming).
      4. To see others' comments as dangerous objections depends, in turn, on Smith's
career decisions. If he left science (and went into teaching) his sensitivity to objections
might be modified. By contrast, we showed in Chapter 3 how objections could be taken
as very serious, even though they turned out to have no significance.
      5 Such technical discussions are not intrinsically different from others; they
correspond to a certain stage and pressures within the agonistic field. Wilson's
transition from questions of theory ("how would you explain this mechanism?") to
questions of general technique ("on which assay do you try that?") depended on his
confidence in his colleagues. When his confidence was really low, he would ask more
specific questions ("show me your book"), and if it did not go well at all, Wilson on
some occasions probed the use of relatively menial procedures ("which sample did you
use, where did you take the powder? How did you number the racks?") His confidence
and vested interests were crucial to the kind of questions in which he engaged.
      6. In most of the discussions of the past, issues of the correct allocation of credit
were the main focus. See Chapter 5.
      7. One main advantage of our anthropological perspective is its reliance on a
wealth of written documents: papers, protocol books, articles in journals, letters, and
The Microprocessing of Facts                                                          185

even the transcripts of conversations. As long as such written documents are available,
the tools of semiotics, exegesis, and ethnomethodology can be applied. At first sight,
however, "thought processes" do not lend themselves to this kind of treatment.
       8. This operation matches Hesse's (1966) definition of analogical process. In
terms of a sorting process, the special interest of X for cancer is sorted out, the notion of
a superimposition between selenium content in water and something which
varies is sorted in and imported into Slovik's specific problem. The analogical
resemblance which explains the proximity and the subsequent step, is the phenomenon
which varies from one region to the other. Our interest is not the analogical reasoning
per se but the absence of such reasoning (analogical or otherwise).
      9. The notion of ideas as a summarised account which enhances belief in the
existence of a thinking self, owes much to Nietzsche's (1974a; 1974b) treatment of
scientific truth.
    10. The simple transformation of statements about things, into stories specific to a
particular genre, is the basis of the Formgeschichte (Bultmann, 1921). Although
obvious when dealing with biblical exegesis,this transformation has not enjoyed much
attention in the study of science.
     11. Crick and Watson (1977) have since explained how Watson's confidence in
Donohue became strong enough to overcome his belief in the authoritative chemistry
textbook. The participants recalled that the fact that Donohue was the only person
(apart from Pauling) who could be believed was crucial.
    12. Once again, this example matches Hesse's (1966) scheme. Bis's work on
neurotensin is sorted out, the principle of a temperature assay is borrowed and imported
into the bombesin area. The link which makes the connection possible is the similarity
between bombesin and neurotensin. However, the crossing or hybridisation concerns
physical events rather than notions or concepts: an assay is crossed with a substance.
    13. The expression is taken from the referee's report: "The findings per se are an
expansion of the orginal work of B and his co-workers on neurotensin, but the marked
potency of bombesin ... on temperature is an outstanding contribution." The terms
extension and outstanding indicate the referee's grasp of the analogical process. The
first published paper retains some traces of the analogical path: "Because of the
similarities of the biological activities of these peptides and their distribution in the
CNS, we have tested several naturally occurring peptides." The subsequent paper
starts from a new role of these peptides in the central nervous system.
     14. Of course, the adoption of this perspective was a practical necessity. The
participants were themselves very much aware that they were engaged in construction.
     15. This has been the stock in trade of philosophers since Hume's radical treatment
of the problem.
     16. When asked to describe the object of a statement which has been "discovered,"
scientists invariably repeated the statement. By repeating the same statement in less
detail, however, it is possible to convey the impression that there is more to reality than
is being said. The incompleteness of this description is taken as an indication that the
object is not entirely exhausted by knowledge of it (See Sartre, 1943).
     17. The history of the construction of this substance will be related in detail
elsewhere. By contrast with the case of TRF, the observer was present from initial
attempts to construct this substance up until its final solidification and use in industrial
processes.
     18. The question now raised is what kind of explanation is applicable to the
settlement of controversy, given that its truth statement cannot be used. Although we
186                                                             LABORATORY LIFE


indicate some of the answers in the case of TRF, and go on to outline a general model of
explanation in Chapter 6, our main intention here is to extricate the question from the
remnants of the realist position.
    19. Our use of the term shadow contrasts with Plato's original use of the term. For
us, reality (ideas in Plato's terms) is the shadow of scientific practice.
    20. Frequently, in histories of epistemology (for example, Bachelard, 1934) the
argument of efficacy is used when the argument of truth becomes untenable; conventionalists take over (Poincare, 1905) when realists are defeated (and vice versa). The
argument that it works is not more nor less mysterious than the argument that it fits
reality
    21. Many of the substances (and their analogues) mentioned in earlier chapters are
patented. Substances "discovered" in the laboratory are described in the texts of
patents as having been "invented." This shows that the ontological status of statements
is rarely likely to be finally settled: depending on the prevailing interests of the parties
concerned, the "same" substance can be given a new status.
    22. The notion of reliability is itself subject to negotiation (Collins, 1974; Bloor,
 1976). When, for example, several laboratories failed to confirm the results produced
by members of our laboratory, the latter simply recast these failures as evidence of the
others' imcompetence (VII, 12).
    23. We do not wish to argue another version of the induction problem in
philosophical terms; we simply want to put the problem on an empirical footing so as to
make it amenable to study by sociologists of science. On an empirical basis, neither
TRF nor somatostatin escape the material and social networks in which they are
continually constructed and deconstructed. For a discussion of the case of somastatin,
see Brazeau and Guillemin (1974).
    24. This wonderment is particularly marked in matters of science. Nobody wonders
that the first steam engine from Newcastle has now developed into a worldwide railway
network. Similarly, nobody takes this extension as the proof that a steam engine can
circulate even where there are no rails! By the same token, it has to be remembered that
the extension of a network is an expensive operation, and that steam engines circulate
only on the lines upon which it has made been made to circulate. Even so, observers of
science frequently marvel at the "verification" of a fact within a network in which it was
constructed. At the same time they happily forget the cost of the extension of the
network. The only explanation for this double standard is that a fact is supposed to be an
idea. Unfortunately, empirical observation of laboratories make this idealisation of
facts impossible.
Chapter 5




CYCLES OF CREDIT




Each of the preceding chapters has portrayed laboratory life from a
somewhat different perspective. The anthropological approach of
Chapter 2 demonstrated the importance of literary inscription in the
laboratory; the historical treatment in Chapter 3 showed the dependence of facts on their construction within a particular material
context; and Chapter 4 encroached on the ground of epistemology in
order to demonstrate the microprocesses at work in the constitution of
phenomena such as "having i d e a s " "using logical arguments," and
constructing "proofs." One advantage of this style of presentation is
that, for the most part, we have been able to cut across many of the
distinctions with which the study of science is often associated. For
example, in Chapter 3 we were able to analyse scientific activity
without commitment to either side of the distinction between fact and
artefact. Similarly, in the last chapter, we attempted to examine the
operation of microprocesses without committing ourselves to either a
realist or relativist position. The main reason for our not wanting to
ally ourselves with one or the other side of these distinctions is that we
found that these distinctions provided a resource for participants in the
laboratory. It seems inappropriate to use such distinctions in order to

                                                                     187
188                                                LABORATORY LIFE


understand laboratory activity when they were themselves found to be
constituted through this activity.
   One particular distinction has remained unexplicated in our discussion so far, although it has been hinted at during various stages of the
argument. We refer to the distinction between the production of facts
and the individuals involved in this production. Of course, we have
already referred to the workforce responsible for the activation of
inscription devices (Ch. 2), the makers of decisions and investments
(Ch. 3) and the proponents of ideas and arguments (Ch. 4). Nevertheless, we have as yet said little about scientists as individuals. In
particular, we have avoided taking the individual scientist as the
starting point or main unit of analysis in our discussion. This may seem
odd in an essay avowedly concerned with the social construction of
facts. Yet it fits well with our observations of laboratory life: the
overall impression which emerges from the field notes is that before
being an individual or a mind, each of our informants was part of a
laboratory. Consequently, it was the work sequences, networks, and
techniques of argument which suggested themselves as more appropriate units of analysis than individuals. In addition, we noticed that the
distinction between the individual and the work done by him provided
an important resource in the construction of facts. Our informants
were constantly engaged in debates concerning the place of the
individual and his or her association with work which had been done.
As we noted earlier (Ch. 1 ), the invocation of the presence of human
agency can provide a powerful means of undercutting claims to
facticity. On several occasions, informants reported that it was they
who had had a certain idea; subsequently, however, other members of
the laboratory reported the same idea to have resulted from "the
group's thinking process." The observation that the distinction between
individuals and their activity acted as a resource for participants was a
further reason for our unwillingness to take the individual as the
starting point for analysis.
   In this chapter we examine the currency of this distinction and look
at the way it was persuasively employed in the laboratory. Many of the
scientists we observed had successfully used the distinction to
construct an individual's career for themselves, a career which was
quite clearly separated from the material and economic aspects of
laboratory activity. Less successful participants, such as some of the
technicians, found themselves with careers which were inextricably
bound up with the material elements of the laboratory. We shall
Cycles of Credit                                                      189

attempt to account for the construction of individual careers without
separating the resulting individual from the activity of fact construction
in the course of which he is created. To do this, we use the notion of
credit to link together aspects of laboratory activity which are usually
discussed under the rubrics of sociology, economics, and epistemology.
In the first part of the chapter, we argue that an extended notion of
credit can link together these apparently disparate aspects of laboratory activity; in the second part of the chapter, we apply this notion of
credit to the careers and group structure of our particular laboratory. 1


Credit: Reward and Credibility

                   WHAT MOTIVATES SCIENTISTS?

   What drives scientists to set up inscription devices, write papers,
construct objects, and occupy different positions? What makes a
scientist migrate from one subject to another, from one laboratory to
another, to choose this or that method, this or that piece of data, this or
that stylistic form, this or that analogical path? One way to answer
these questions is to postulate norms impressed upon the scientist
during his training and silently enforced during his subsequent career.
As has been noted elsewhere, however, attempts to derive the
existence of norms from the kind of material available to us are prone
to major difficulties (Mulkay, 1975). In particular, we were unable to
identify explicit appeal to the norms of science, except in very few
instances. Some of these more nearly constituted an appeal to
counternorms (Mitroff, 1 974): "everyone pushes ones' own stuff, it's
normal-Normal?-I mean human" (IV, 57). Other remarks seemed
designed solely to give a good impression. For example, when asking
his technician to set up an instrument for the next bioassay, Nathan
said: "If we don't do that double check, people could argue that the
numbers in our paper are due to. . . . " When later asked why he had
used this instrument, Nathan replied: "In science, you should always
be overcautious" (X,2). The justification in terms of possible debate
and criticism was thus recast for the benefit of the outside observer in
terms of norms. Of course, it could be said on the basis of Nathan's last
statement that norms are present but invisible, but even if we grant this
kind of inferential leap, norms could not explain the choices of
laboratory, subject area, or an item of data. At best, norms simply
190                                                        LABORATORY LIFE


delineate large-scale trends in behaviour; at worst, they simply refer to
themes of ideological discourse (Mulkay, 1975). In either case, the
explanatory power of norms falls well short of our objective of
understanding both science and the scientists who make it.
   An alternative approach to the explanation of scientist's behaviour
pays more careful attention to the terms in which they themselves
explain their behaviour. While appeals to norms were extremely rare
among our respondents, the description of activity in quasi-economic
terms was pervasive, especially among younger scientists. 2 Consider
the following examples:

This instrument can bring me ten papers a year (II, 95).

We had a sort of joint account with him; he got the credit, we got it too; now
we cannot draw on it anymore (VI, 12).

Why working on this (substance), we are not the best in this area; we
invested a lot in the releasing factor field . . . we are the best in it, we'd
better stay in it (VII, 183).

Here, then, are typical instances of the use of notions of investment
and return. Such usage was not limited to occasional utterances;
sometimes it was sustained throughout long and more sophisticated
explanations of career patterns. In one exchange, for example, A
volunteered an overall picture of why people do science. His explanation was a complex mixture of liberal political economics, social
darwinism, cybernetics,and endocrinology:

[A]ll depends on feedback, what is your threshold of satisfaction, what is
the quality, and the frequency of the feedback you need . . . it is difficult to
handle all the variables. I was a physician . . . I wanted a place where you
are paid more than $20,000 a year . . . this was obligatory medicine . . . but
I wanted positive feedback proving my smartness . . . patients are not so
good for that . . . I want a very rare commodity: recognition from peers . . .
I moved to science . . . O.K., but I am a high achiever . . . I do not need
frequent feedback like Bradt so I can choose subjects which are not too
rewarding at the beginning (VI, 52).

Most widely shared were the evaluations by a new investigator of
opportunity in his field. On five occasions during interviews, respondents sketched a curve representing the growth of their discipline and
explained why they entered it or left depending on fluctuations in the
curve. For example:
Cycles of Credit                                                                  191

[T]his is peptide chemistry, see . . . it's tapering off. . . . I knew Brunick's
laboratory works only on that, so I didn't go there, but now . . . [draws
another ascending curve] this is the future, molecular biology, and I knew
that this lab. would move faster to this new area (XIII, 30).

Whether or not these statements correspond more to respondent's real
motives than to a set of convenient justifications, we are unable to
resolve. However, we take as significant respondents' constant reference to investment, rewarding studies and exciting opportunities.
Frequently, they related their efforts to what they called market
fluctuations and drew lines to show how these fluctuations explained
their behaviour. The complexity of these self-representations through
economic or business metaphors contrasts sharply with the simplicity
of norms. This complexity is exemplified by T's explanation for his
wish to leave science and go into teaching:

Science has been for me largely dissatisfying by comparison with the
investment I put in it . . . I can anticipate that it will be like that later . . . I
really worked harder than I thought justified for the amount of positive
feedback that I got. . . .
Q: What do you mean by that?
T: By positive feedback I mean the satisfaction of having a problem solved
and the gratification obtained in communicating it to others (VI, 71).

T went on to explain that he regretted leaving science, but that it was a
case of all or nothing especially because his work was "not cheap
research. . . . I'd need $100,000 at least, to equip a laboratory." On
the other hand, he thought it possible that the state to which he was
moving might become rich enough to be able to fund him. He added:

[M]y ability to find a job in research again will be increased in one year
when the papers we are writing now will be published . . . but if I wait one
more year after teaching, I will be definitely screwed up (VI, 73).

T's calculation thus involved consideration of available funds, the
extent of positive feedback, the general funding policy of a particular
state, and the publication and reception of his papers. Since all these
factors were reckoned to vary with time, T's major concern was to
determine when best to capitalise on the opportunities available.
   Of course, the frequent use by informants of economic analogies
does not mean that economic models are necessarily the best explanation of their behaviour. It does suggest, however, that explanations
192                                                        LABORATORY LIFE


exclusively in terms of social norms are inadequate. More significantly,
it is clear from the examples above that scientists talked about data,
policy and their careers almost in the same breath. They thus appeared
to be working with a model of their own behaviour which made no
distinction between internal and external factors.

       LIMITATIONS OF THE NOTION OF CREDIT AS REWARD

   A possible interpretation of the above examples is that scientists are
using economic metaphors to talk about credit. It might be said, for
example, that assessments of opportunity and return from investment
are metaphorical reformulations of the processes whereby credit is
allocated. It is true that a good deal of laboratory conversations
included mention of the term credit. The observers' notebooks reveal
the almost daily reference to the distribution of credit. Furthermore,
the term credit was used explicitly by informants in interview. Overall,
credit was used in four ways. Firstly, it was a commodity which could
be exchanged. For example, the end of a letter of thanks for the loan of
some slides included the following:

Thank you again for giving me the opportunity to use them in future
lectures. Please rest assured that I will, of course, credit you for them.

Secondly, credit could be shared:

[H]e shared most of the credit with me, which was very generous of him,
because I was a young puppy at the time.

Thirdly, it could be stolen:

He says my laboratory, but it is not his, it's our's and we are going to do all
the work, but he will get all the credit.

Fourthly, it could be either accumulated or wasted. These different
usages indicate that credit has all the character of a currency. As we
shall show, however, overreliance on explanations of scientists'
behaviour in terms of their quest for this currency, entails misleading
oversimplification.
  The prevalence of references to credit made us suspicious. An
outsider, especially one bearing the label of sociologist, might well
expect to be fed stories about credit because this is regarded as suitable
Cycles of Credit                                                      193


material for exponents of what is often perceived as an essentially
muckraking endeavour. Since respondents are unable, at least initially,
to discuss the details of their scientific work with outsiders, they tend
to respond in terms of topics which they feel are appropriate, that is,
gossip, scandal, and rumour. Consequently, we would expect reference to credit to be more frequent in exchanges with outside observers
than with other participants. In our laboratory, this effect was
exacerbated by the prevalence of strong feelings about certain recent
instances of the maldistribution of credit. On many occasions respondents had to be persuaded to discuss the process of science rather than
the allocation of credit! Clearly, certain local conditions accounted for
the unusual predominance of reference to credit. 3
   Although scientists discussed credit, they did not do so all the time.
In particular, little mention was made of credit when they discussed
their data or when they talked about the future. When asked in
interviews why they had come to this laboratory, or why they had
chosen a particular problem area or method, not one of our twenty
interviewees answered in terms of the availability of credit. Here then
is a paradox: participants talked freely and even tirelessly about credit
in some situations but never mentioned it in others. By looking
carefully at these two sets of situations, one gets the impression that
although important, the notion of credit as reward is a secondary
phenomenon. For example, it was only at the end of a long letter asking
for substances, proposing experiments, and suggesting ideas that
Herbert offered his thanks for the reception at a recent meeting and
added: "About your earlier work with . . . you certainly deserve all the
credit for these early and astute behavioural observations." It is,
however, not possible to account for the rest of the letter on the basis of
this reference to a past episode. At the end of a discussion with A, C
commented: "You will get a lot of credit for that." But this scarcely
permits us to explain their whole two-hour discussion in terms of their
quest for credit. At the end of his long report, one referee wrote:
"Dopamine was first reported to inhibit . . . in vitro by Mc . . . [ref]
who should be quoted here." The referee could be seen to be invoking a
rule of credit sharing at this point. But this does not explain the wealth
of his previous comments. References to credit can frequently be
found, but it only assumes prominence in discussions of the past, or of
group structure, or of issues of priority. Consequently, credit as reward
cannot adequately account for the behaviour of a scientist practising
science. Rather, it explains a limited set of phenomena, such as the
194                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


delayed repartition of resources in the aftermath of some scientific
achievement.
  It is, of course, possible to argue that scientists are motivated by a
quest for credit even though they do not talk about it and deny that
credit in the form of reward is their motive. But this would require the
existence of a system of repression to explain how the real motive
(credit) never appears consciously in the participant's account of his
motivation. Instead of pursuing ad hoc explanations it may be better
to suppose that scientists are not motivated simply by credit. If, for
example, informants report in interviews that they chose a certain
method because it yielded reliable data, is their reference to reliability
to be taken as a disguised form of concern about obtaining credit?
When another respondent reports that he wanted to solve the problem
of how the learning process works at the brain level, is this to be
understood as obscure way of saying that he wanted credit?

                    THE QUEST FOR CREDIBILITY

   The Oxford Dictionary gives several definitions of credit, only one
of which ("recognition of merit") corresponds to the sense in which
some sociologists use the term to denote credit as reward. The
alternative dictionary definitions are:
  (1) The attribute of being generally believed in . . . credibility.
  (2) Personal influence based on the confidence of others.
  (3) Reputation of solvency and probity in business, enabling a
      person or body to be trusted with goods or money in expectation
      of future payment.
   It is clear, therefore, that credit can also be associated with belief,
power, and business activity. For our laboratory scientists, credit had
a much wider sense than simple reference to reward. In particular,
their use of credit suggests an integrated economic model of the
production of facts. In order to examine this possibility, let us look in
some detail at the career of one scientist and assess which definition of
credit most usefully explains it.
   In interview, Dietrich revealed that after obtaining a medical degree
he moved out of medicine in order to do research: "I was not very
interested in money, research was more interesting more difficult and
challenging" (XI, 85). His next decision was where to do graduate
studies: "Bern was not bad, but Munich was a much better place, more
prestigious and more interesting" (XI, 85). As has been shown
elsewhere, the location of a scientist's training has a significant
Cycles of Credit                                                                 195


influence on his or her future career. In economic terms, graduate
training at Munich was worth several times more than the same
training at Bern. In other words, Dietrich realised that he would be
more highly accredited if he trained at Munich. From this we can see
that the beginning of a scientist's career entails a series of decisions by
which individuals gradually accumulate a stock of credentials. These
credentials correspond to the evaluation by others of possible future
investments in Dietrich.

Then I went to a Congress at Eilat . . . I realized the interest of neurophysiology. . . . This seemed to be a good field, not crowded, bound to be more
and more important . . . not like cancer which one day will be solved and
put to an end (XI, 85).

Dietrich thus explained his decision to work in neurophysiology in
terms of his interest. At the same time, we can see the elements of a
quasi-economical calculation through which a young investigator
evaluated the opportunities of a field and his chances in it. The
evaluation of his prospects entailed an assessment of the likely return
from his own investment of effort. Dietrich's next step was to choose
someone working in the field.

I heard about X at this Congress. I went to see him, but he turned me
down . . . he did not want physicians . . . he didn't want to form a group of
young guys . . . it's a waste of time (XI, 85).

According to what he had heard at the meeting, Dietrich knew that X
was the best in the field. For Dietrich, this meant that the same
investment in X's group would be much more effective than in any
other. The hiring process entailed negotiation during which either side
attempted to evaluate the capital that the other could offer.

But X told me to see Y at [Institute]. . . . Y told me to work on that subject,
that it should be finished in a year, and that he would support me in getting
tenure at . . . the subject was to localize an enzyme in the brain . . . he was
completely wrong about the timing because it is still an open question . . .
but I wanted a position so I followed his advice. . . . I got a position at. . . . I
wrote my dissertation and had several publications (XI, 85).

  This is a good example of a smooth start to a career. The inscription
devices worked and sufficient documents were generated to support
his papers and dissertation. In short, Y's investment had paid off. But
1 96                                                       LABORATORY LIFE


the return in terms of reward was marginal. Dietrich's work was
neither widely acclaimed nor regarded as an outstanding achievement.
Yet with Y's backing it was enough to secure him tenure. Dietrich was
now an accredited researcher who was able to work in the field in
earnest.

This enzyme was not well studied before. I showed that what people said
before was wrong . . . they purified it 1000 times and claimed it was pure, I
purified it 30,000 times and showed that it was still not pure. . . . I can say
that I advanced toward the characterization of this enzyme (XI , 85).

   This contribution represented an incremental scientific advance,
with all the elements of a typical operation(see Chapter 2), a change in
standards of purification and a parallel change in technique. Dietrich
could sum up his position thus: "Curiously, a lot of people studied the
degradation of acetylcholine but very few the synthesis. . . . I am the
world expert [laughing] . . . on this enzyme." This particular producer
of facts established access to a market for his contributions. As a
result, he would be invited to any meeting which discussed this
enzyme. He would be cited in any paper dealing with this issue. He was
thus able to transform his small savings into greater revenue.

To do the mapping in the brain with fluorescent methods you need an
antibody which is monospecific, but to raise this antibody you need a pure
enzyme. For me, I told you, even purified 30,000 times, it is still not pure
enough to be specific . . . but someone in Houston claimed he has a pure
enzyme.

In order to obtain credible data he required a particular inscriptiondevice with specific technical capabilities. Clearly, if too much noise
was generated, the data could not be warranted as reliable. In the
market there was a demand for a pure enzyme; since it was not
information which could be communicated, Dietrich had to move to
Houston in order to collaborate with Z. Dietrich hoped to obtain new
data by using his own methods on Z's pure material. The project was a
failure, however, because Z's claim was not supported by any data. Z
did not have the enzyme. But Dietrich had access to other more
important resources and saw his opportunity w i t h i n another specialty.

I have always been interested in peptides. . . . I was blocked a bit in this, my
boss was an impossible guy . . . also I knew Parine and I wanted to go to the
West Coast.
Cycles of Credit                                                      197

 Dietrich was able to obtain money in the form of a fellowship to work
 with Flower at the institute. Fellowships constitute an advance made
 by private or federal institutions to investigators once they have
 proven their solvency. Subsequently, such advances are refunded
 indirectly by way of publication and facts. "At least, I had shown I
 could work by myself, that's the most important thing."
    By chance. Parine put Dietrich to work on a subject of considerably
 greater importance than his previous enzyme study. In other words,
 the same amount of work had a much greater impact in the new field (in
 terms of access to funds, reception of citations and invitation to
 congresses than it would have done in the first. As a result of his
 association with S, Dietrich received increasingly attractive offers (in
 terms of space, technicians, independence, and materials) to persuade
 him to return to Germany. "You see, I am now a specialist in peptides
 at a time when it's ripe in Germany, and when they have very few of
 them" (XI, 86). In the Institute, Dietrich enjoyed greater access to a
 much more active market than had been the case in Germany. The
 simple fact of his association with S and W gave him substantial
 credibility, both in terms of prestige and material resources. By being
 at the institute, Dietrich obtained access to communication networks,
 substances, and technicians, and he was able to tap the vast capital of
 material resources described in Chapter 2. The investments made by
 Dietrich had an enormous payoff both because of a concentration of
credit in the institute and because of a high demand for credible
 information in the field. In addition, his German nationality enabled
 him to play on the variations between currencies. He could obtain a
much higher return for his efforts in Germany as a result of his work in
the U.S. But the laboratory space, the technicians, the independence,
and grant money made available to him in Germany were not offered
as a form of reward. Rather, these were material resources to be
quickly reinvested in new inscription devices, and in the production of
data, papers, and facts. Were these investments in his work not to pay
off, Dietrich would lose credibility. In this respect, scientists' behaviour
 is remarkably similar to that of an investor of capital. An accumulation
of credibility is prerequisite to investment. The greater this stockpile,
the more able the investor to reap substantial returns and thus add
further to his growing capital. 4
    To repeat, it would be wrong to regard the receipt of reward as the
ultimate objective of scientific activity. In fact, the receipt of reward is
just one small portion of a large cycle of credibility investment. The
1 98                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


essential feature of this cycle is the gain of credibility which enables
reinvestment and the further gain of credibility. Consequently, there is
no ultimate objective to scientific investment other than the continual
redeployment of accumulated resources. It is in this sense that we liken
scientists' credibility to a cycle of capital investment.

 CONVERSION FROM ONE FORM OF CREDIBILITY TO ANOTHER

   Although Dietrich's career path undoubtedly involved a series of
decisions based on precise and complex calculations of interest, the
exact nature of this interest remains at issue. If we limit ourselves to
the notion of the pursuit of reward for scientific contributions, it is clear
that Dietrich is bankrupt. After investing for ten years, he is almost
unknown, having received less than eight citations a year, no awards,
and having made few friends. If, however, we extend the notion of
credit to include credibility, we can see a much more successful career.
He has good credentials, he has produced credible data using two sorts
of methods, and now works in a new and important area at an
institution with an enormous accumulation of resources. In terms of
his pursuit of reward, his career makes little sense; as an investor of
credibility it has been very successful.
    By distinguishing between credit as reward and credit as credibility,
we are not merely playing on words. Credit as reward refers to the
sharing of rewards and awards which symbolise peers' recognition of a
past scientific achievement. Credibility on the other hand, concerns
 scientists' abilities actually to do science. We saw at the end of
 Chapter 2 how a statement could be transformed from a claim to a fact
by the use of documents which made unnecessary the continued
 inclusion of modalities. Statements thus supported by the appropriate
documents can be said to be credible in the same way as individuals are
credible or instruments are reliable. The notion of credibility can thus
 apply both to the very substance of scientific production (facts) and to
the influence of external factors, such as money and institutions. The
 notion of credibility allows the sociologist to relate external factors to
 internal factors and vice versa. The same notion of credibility can be
 applied to scientists' investment strategies, to epistemological theories,
 to the scientific reward system, and to scientific education. Credibility
 thus allows the sociologist to move without difficulty between these
 different aspects of social relations in science.
    If we suppose that scientists are investors of credibility rather than
just reward seekers, we can easily explain a number of otherwise
Cycles of Credit                                                                   199


strange cases of scientific behaviour in terms of the conversion by
scientists of one form of credibility into another. We can best elucidate
this point by way of four examples:

(a) When I consider all the investment I made in this substance in the
laboratory and I don't even have a good assay for it: If Ray is unable to set
up this assay, he will be fired (XIII, 83).

The investment referred to here was in terms of both money and time.
On the basis of this investment, a payoff was expected in the form of
data which could support an argument in a forthcoming article. The
worth of the person put in charge of the assay depended on the quality
of the assay and the data produced. If the assay failed, Ray would lose
credibility and would lose both his investment and the data required to
support his argument. Consequently, X warned Ray (albeit indirectly)
that his position was at stake. In this case, data from the bioassay was
necessary to support an argument. Success in the bioassay was
necessary to support Ray's authority. This authority was necessary, in
turn, to support his position. Lastly, X's investments had to be
supported or repaid by a new paper.

(b) The peak of the field has passed . . . it really boomed after P's
experiment like that. . . . A lot of people flooded into that field and . . . after
a while, when nothing new happened it seemed more and more impossible
. . . . Expectations were so high that people published papers without any
experiment, just speculation. . . . Then a lot of people got negative answers
when they tried to replicate that. . . the accumulation of negative results
dampened expectations (VIII, 37).

As a result, a number of people, including P, began to leave the field.
The initial experiment had prompted a small gold-rush and career
paths had changed direction as people invested in a new field. Initially,
standards were such that no experiment was necessary. Almost any
proposition was accredited in the prevailing atmosphere of excitement.
When hard data began to flow, however, a large variety of propositions
were bankrupted one after the other. Negative results thus modified
career expectations once again.
   Speaking about an investigator in another field, Y said:

(c) I supported the earlier results of this guy . . . when a lot of people took that
as garbage; he is a big shot in his field . . . so now he invited me to meetings and
it's a good occasion for me to meet new people in another field (X, 48).
200                                                       LABORATORY LIFE


Y's faith in another scientists's proposition was eventually converted
into invitations to meetings. Furthermore, this invitation provided a
good occasion to get acquainted with others and to become informed of
new ideas. The same information would subsequently be converted
into a new experiment. Thus, confidence in someone else's data, which
were thought controversial, constituted a capital investment. The
investment could be repaid in this example by virtue of the other
scientist's position ("he is a big shot'').
   K and L were counting samples on the beta counter. K is fifteen
years older than L.

(d) L: Look at these figures, it's not bad.
K: Well, believe in my experience, when it's not much more above 100, it's
not good, it's noise.
L: The noise is pretty consistent though.
K: It does not change much, but with this noise you can't convince people . . .
I mean good people (XIII , 32).

From the perspective of some epistemologists, we would expect the
reliability of data to be an issue quite distinctly separated from the
evaluation of individuals in the field. Thus, the assessment of data
should not be so obviously linked to the rhetorical operation of
convincing others and should vary neither according to the individual
who is doing the interpreting nor according to the audience to whom the
results are addressed. Nevertheless, examples such as the above
reveal that scientists frequently make connections between these
superficially foreign issues. In fact, such issues are all part of one cycle
of credibility. Consequently, the connections made between them can
be explained in terms of the conversion between different forms of
credibility. It is not surprising, therefore, that a participant simultaneously évalues the quality of data, the standing of the audience, and
his own career strategy. 5
   Figure 5.1 illustrates the cycle of credibility. The notion of
credibility makes possible the conversion between money, data,
prestige, credentials, problem areas, argument, papers, and so on.
Whereas many studies of science focus on one or other small section of
this circle, our argument is that each facet is but one part of an endless
cycle of investment and conversion. If, for example, we portray
scientists as motivated by a search for reward, only a small minority of
the observed activity can be explained. If instead we suppose that
scientists are engaged in a quest for credibility, we are better able to
Cycles of Credit                                                   201




make sense both of their different interests and of the process by which
one kind of credit is transformed into another. 6

           THE DEMAND FOR CREDIBLE INFORMATION

  In order to understand the full force of the difference between reward
and credibility, it is necessary to distinguish between the process by
202                                                         LABORATORY LIFE


which reward is bestowed and the process by which credibility is
assessed. Both reward and credibility originate essentially from peers'
comments about other scientists. Thus, even the award of a Nobel
Prize depends on various submissions, recommendations, and assessments by working scientists. But what form do these evaluative
comments take in the laboratory itself? Two features are readily
apparent. Firstly, evaluative comments made by scientists make no
distinction between scientists as people and their scientific claims.
Secondly, the main thrust of these comments turn on an assessment of
the credibility which can be invested in an individual's claim. The
possibility of bestowing reward is a marginal consideration. A striking
illustration of this is provided by the following example: C and Parine
were in the bioassay room when C asked Glenn to synthesize a peptide
which another colleague, T, had claimed to be more active than endorphin. When a syringe of the peptide had been prepared, C made
ready to inject a rat on the surgery table:

I bet you the peptide is going to do nothing . . . this is the confidence I have
in my friend T. [C squeezed the syringe and enjoined the rat]: O.K., Charles
T., tell us. [A few minutes passed.) See, nothing happened . . . if anything
the rat is even stiffer [sigh]. Ah, my friend T . . . I went to his laboratory in
New York and saw his records . . . which lead to publication . . . it made me
feel uncomfortable (V, 53).

   This incident underscores the common conflation of colleague and
his substance: the credibility of the proposal and of the proposer are
identical. If the substance had the desired effect on the rat, T's
credibility would have increased. If, on the other hand, he had had
more confidence in T, C would have been surprised by the result. This
is made particularly clear in the following:

Last week, my prestige was very low, X said I was not reliable, that my
results were poor and that he was not impressed. . . . Yesterday, I showed
him my results . . . good lord, now he is very nice, he says, he was very
impressed and that I will get a lot of credit for that (XI , 85).

For a working scientist, the most vital question is not "Did I repay my
debt in the form of recognition because of the good paper he wrote?"
but "Is he reliable enough to be believed? Can I trust him/his claim? Is
he going to provide me with hard facts?" Scientists are thus interested
in one another not because they are forced by a special system of norms
Cycles of Credit                                                            203


to acknowledge others' achievements, but because each needs the
other in order to increase his own production of credible information.
   Our discussion of the demand for credible information contrasts
with two influential models of the exchange system in science
proposed by Hagstrom (1965) and Bourdieu (1975b). Both models
have obviously been influenced by economics. Hagstrom's model
employs the economics of preindustrial societies and portrays the
relation between two scientists as that of gift exchange. According to
Hagstrom, however, the expectation of exchange is never made
explicit:

   [T¡he public disavowal of the expectation of recognition in return for
   scientific contributions should no more be taken to mean that the
   expectation is absent than the magnanimous front of the kula trader can
   be taken to mean that he does not expect a return gift (Hagstrom, 1965:
   14).

Explicit reference to the expectation of exchange occurred in many of
the cases we observed. There was no suggestion that our scientists had
to maintain a fiction that they were not expecting any return gift.
Consequently, the basic argument that scientists are gift givers does
not seem warranted. Indeed, we can pose the same question which
Hagstrom himself asked:

   But why should gift giving be important in science when it is essentially
   obsolete as a form of exchange in most other areas of modern life,
   especially the most distinctly "civilized" areas? (Hagstrom, 1965: 19)

Hagstrom provides no reasons for the survival of this antiquated
tradition in the scientific community other than the fact that the same
phenomenon is evident in other professional spheres. In all such
professional spheres, Hagstrom argues,

  The gift exchange [or the norm of service], as opposed to barter or
  contractual exchange is particularly well suited to social systems in
  which great reliance is placed on the ability of well-socialized persons to
  operate independently of formal controls (Hagstrom, 1965: 2 1 ) .

For Hagstrom, then, the archaic system of gift exchange is functionally
corequisite to the maintenance of social norms. In other words, the
archaic system of potlach is seen as a way of supporting the central
204                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


system of norms. Even scientists' publication strategies are manifestations of conformity to norms through participation in gift exchange:

  The desire to obtain social recognition induces the scientist to conform
  to scientific norms by contributing his discoveries to the larger
  community (Hagstrom, 1965: 16).

Scientific activity is governed by norms, and the enforcement of these
norms entails the existence of a special system of gift giving. But this
system is never made mention of by participants. Indeed, if scientists
deny they are expecting a return gift, this can be taken as proof of the
success of their training and their rigorous conformity to the norms.
We have here an explanation of an exchange system in terms of norms
which is both empirically undemonstrable and which the author
himself considers an inexplicable and paradoxical archaism.
  Why should Hagstrom use a primitive exchange analogy to explain
relationships between scientists? We had the distinct impression that
the constant investment and transformation of credibility taking place
in the laboratory mirrored economic operations typical of modern
capitalism. Hagstrom was struck by the apparent absence of transfers
of money. But this feature should not lead to the formulation of a model
designed to preserve the existence of norms. Do scientists read each
other out of deference to norms? Does one individual read a paper so as
to force its author to read his work in return? Hagstrom's exchange
system has the aura of a rather contrived fairy tale: scientists read
papers as a matter of courtesy, and similarly thank their authors out of
politeness. Let us look at one more example of scientific exchange in
order to show that this view is needlessly complicated.
   One of the main problems in studying diabetes was the difficulty of
discriminating between the effects of insulin and glucagon in a diabetic
patient's glucose level. In other words, attempts to study the effects of
insulin were foiled because of the "noise" generated by glucagon, the
effects of which it was impossible to suppress. In 1974, however, a new
substance called somatostatin was isolated (in a completely unrelated
field), which was found to inhibit the secretion of both growth
hormones and glucagon (Brazeau and Guillemin, 1974). Somatostatin
was immediately imported into the field of diabetic study and used to
decrease the effect of glucagon.

  The discovery of GH releasing inhibiting hormone, Somatostatin, might
  open the way to an objective evaluation of the role of glucagon in
Cycles of Credit                                                         205

  diabetes. It will soon be possible to follow diabetic patients with
  competely suppressed glucagon secretion.

This passage, written by a clinician, indicates the potential importance
of glucagon. If at this point, someone had told the clinicians that he
knew the structure of a glucagon suppressor substance, he would have
been seized violently by the lapels. Why? Because the clinician would
have felt overcome by a desire to reward this individual for his
contribution? Or because he felt a debt of honour to the individual's
achievement? No. The clinician's violent reaction would stem from his
ability, once armed with the new information, to rush to his bench or
his ward and set up a protocol in which one of the causes of noise in his
inscription device can be controlled. The clinician would not be
obliged to disburse credit to the bearer of information, nor even to cite
his paper. The utility of the information for the generation of fresh
information is crucial, whereas the subsequent bestowal of recognition
is only a secondary concern to the scientist.
   Bourdieu's model of scientific exchange compares scientists' behaviour with that of modern businessmen rather than precapitalist
dealers and traders. The absence of money in scientific exchange does
not cut any ice with him because of his experience in studying
exchange systems in fields other than science. For Bourdieu ( 1975b),
economic exchange can include the accumulation and investment of
resources other than money. By using the idea of symbolic capital
Bourdieu describes the investment strategies in fields such as education or art in terms of modern capitalism. Even business strategies are
analyzed from the point of view of accumulation of symbolic (rather
than just monetary) capital. By contrast with Hagstrom, Bourdieu
(1975b) does not attempt to explain scientists' behaviour in terms of
norms. Norms, the socialisation processes, deviance, and reward are
the consequences of social activity rather than its causes. Similarly,
Bourdieu takes the position that science can be studied without forging
ad hoc explanations and in terms of other more usual rules of
economics. For Bourdieu, then, the cause of social activity is the set of
strategies adopted by investors wanting to maximise their symbolic
profit.

  The scientific field is the locus of a competitive struggle, in which the
  specific issue at stake is the monopoly of scientific authority, defined
  inseparably as technical capacity and social power (Bourdieu, 1 975b:
   19).
206                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


Investors' strategies are likened to any other businessman's strategy.
However, it is not made clear why scientists should be interested in one
another's production. Bourdieu simply asserts:

  [T]he transmutation of the anarchic antagonism of particular interests
  into a scientific dialectic becomes more and more complete as the
  interest that each producer of symbolic goods has in producing products
  that, as Fred Reif puts it ''are not only interesting to himself but also
  important to others" . . . comes up against competitors more capable of
  applying the same means (Bourdieu, 1975b: 33).

This tautological explanation of interest is worsened by the absence of
any reference to the content of the science produced. In particular,
there is no analysis of the way in which technical capacity is linked to
social power. This absence might not be a problem in the study of
"haute couture" (Bourdieu, 1975a), but it is absurd in science.
   Neither Bourdieu nor Hagstrom helps us understand why scientists
have any interest in reading each other. Their use of economic models,
derived respectively from capitalist and precapitalist economies, fails
to consider demand. This failure corresponds to their failure to deal
with the contents of the science. As Callón (1975) has argued,
economic models can be applied only if this accounts for the content of
science. Hagstrom and Bourdieu provides useful explanations of the
repartition of credit as a sharing process but they contribute little to an
understanding of the production of value.
   Let us suppose that scientists are investors of credibility. The result
is the creation of a market. Information now has value because, as we
saw above, it allows other investigators to produce information which
facilitates the return of invested capital. There is a demand from
investors for information which may increase the power of their own
inscription devices, and there is a supply of information from other
investors. The forces of supply and demand create the value of the
commodity, which fluctuates constantly depending on supply, demand,
the number of investigators, and the equipment of the producers.
Taking into account the fluctuation of this market, scientists invest
their credibility where it is likely to be most rewarding. Their
assessment of these fluctuations both explains scientists' reference to
"interesting problems," "rewarding subjects," "good methods," and
"reliable colleagues" and explains why scientists constantly move
between problem areas, entering into new collaborative projects,
Cycles of Credit                                                       207

grasping and dropping hypotheses as the circumstances demand,
shifting between one method and another and submitting everything to
the goal of extending the credibility cycle.7
   It would be mistaken to take the central feature of our market model
as the simple exchange of goods for currency. Indeed, at the preliminary stage of fact production, the straightforward exchange of
information for reward is hindered by the fact that the scientist and the
claim are not distinguished. What then is the equivalent of buying in
our economic model of scientific activity? Our scientists only rarely
assessed the success of their operations in terms of formal credit. For
example, they had little idea of the extent to which their work was
cited. They were not normally concerned about the distribution of
awards, and they were only marginally interested in questions of credit
and priority. 8 Indeed, our scientists had a much more subtle way of
accounting success than simply measuring returns in currency. The
success of each investment was evaluated in terms of the extent to
which it facilitated the rapid conversion of credibility and the
scientist's progression through the cycle. For example, a successful
investment might mean that people phone him, his abstracts are
accepted, others show interest in his work, he is believed more easily
and listened to with greater attention, he is offered better positions, his
assays work well, data flow more reliably and form a more credible
picture. The objective of market activity is to extend and speed up the
credibility cycle as a whole. Those unfamiliar with daily scientific
activity will find this portrayal of scientific activity strange unless they
realise that only rarely is information itself "bought." Rather, the
object of "purchase" is the scientist's ability to produce some sort of
information in the future. The relationship between scientists is more
like that between small corporations than that between a grocer and his
customer. Corporations measure their success by looking at the
growth of their operations and the intensity of the circulation of
capital. 9
   Before using this model to interpret the behaviour of our laboratory
scientists, it is important to stress its complete independence of any
argument concerning motivations. Explanations using the notion of
reward required us to suppose that scientists routinely hide their real
motivations when they fail to reveal an explicit interest in credit and
recognition. By contrast, our credibility model can accommodate a
variety of types of motivations. It is not necessary, therefore, to doubt
the motivations expressed in informants' accounts. Scientists are thus
208                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


free to report interest in solving difficult problems, in getting tenure, in
wanting to alleviate the miseries of humanity, in manipulating scientific instruments, or even in the pursuit of true knowledge. Differences
in the expression of motivation are matters of psychological make-up,
ideological climate, group pressure, fashion, and so on.10 Since the
credibility cycle is one single circle through which one form of credit
can be converted into another, it makes no difference whether
scientists variously insist on the primacy of credible data, credentials,
or funding as their prime motivating influence. No matter which
section of the cycle they choose to emphasize or consider as the
objective of investment, they will necessarily have to go through all the
other sections as well.

Strategies, Positions, and Career Trajectories
   In the first part of this chapter we discussed scientists' investments
and portrayed them as investors of credibility. We shall now attempt to
apply the notion of credibility to the particular situation of our
laboratory scientists.

                          CURRICULUM VITAE

   A scientist's curriculum vitae (C.V.) represents a balance sheet of
all his or her investments to date. A typical C.V. contains name, age,
gender, family information, and four sections, each of which corresponds to a particular meaning of credibility. Under "Education," for
example, we may read:

1962:    Bachelor of Science and Agriculture, Vancouver
1964:    Master of Science, Vancouver, B.C., Canada
1968:    Ph.D. (Cellular Biology), University of California

   This list of qualifications represents what could be called the
scientist's accreditation. This in itself does not ensure that the
individual is a scientist, but it does enable him to be admitted to the
game. In investment terms, this individual has the necessary credentials to invest. Such credentials represent the formal return on a large
loan of taxpayers' money (or sometimes private funds) invested in
education and training, Of course, the date, location, and subject
matter of each qualification are all important. For example,
Cycles of Credit                                                      209

   Dr. Hoagland holds his bachelor's degree from Columbia, his master's
   from MIT and his Ph.D. from Harvard (Meiter et al., 1975: 145).

These qualifications are understood to be more impressive than those
in the previous example (Reif, 1961). Similarly, if the subject matter of
a scientist's doctoral examination includes bacterial genetics, he has a
distinct advantage when applying to collaborate with a group which
requires expertise in this area. A scientist's qualifications constitute
cultural capital which is the successful outcome of multiple investments in terms of time, money, energy, and ability. The scientists and
technicians in our laboratory had accumulated more than one hundred
thirty years of college and graduate education.
   Qualifications such as the Ph.D. do not differentiate between
scientists because virtually all scientists possess one. More important
is the information contained in the second section entitled "Positions."

1970    Assistant Research Professor, The Institute
1968-70 Postdoctoral Research Chemist, University of
        California, Riverside
1967-68 Fellow Research Assistant, University of
        California, Riverside

This information indicates both that an individual has been admitted
to the game and that he has actually played sufficiently well to have
obtained a position. For the same reason, C.V.'s record any grants and
awards which have been received:

(1) Alpha Omega Alpha, Hoover Medical Society, Alpha of
    Arizona Chapter
(2) Prizer Scholar
(3) Arizona Medical Student Research Award
    Public Health Service Trainee in Endocrinology, 1965 to 1969
    Public Health Services Postdoctoral Fellowship

The list of grants and awards provides a statement of the extent of
investment already placed in the individual. Thus, the statement of an
individual's credibility represented by his qualifications and position
is reinforced. One further source of reinforcement is the inclusion of
210                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


the names of advisors and head of laboratories where an individual has
worked:

1973-75    Visting research chemist, laboratory of Nathan
           O. Hakan, Department of Chemistry, University of
           Haifa
1966-68    Postdoctoral Fellow, Microbiology Institute,
           University of Copenhagen, Denmark, N. O. Kierkegaard,
           sponsor

The inclusion of these names, together with those of referees from
whom letters of recommendation can be requested, reflect the importance of established relationships as a source of credibility. Readers
can use these names both to ascertain the network in which a scientist
is situated and to identify sources who can vouch for his or her
solvency.
   Of course, none of these characteristics of curricula vitae are
peculiar to researchers. What is particular is not so much a scientist's
academic position (or appointment) but rather his position in the field.
Readers may wish to know which problems the scientist has solved,
which set of techniques and expertise he or she is familiar with and
which problems the scientist is likely to be able to solve in the future.
Frequently, however, the statement of academic positions and positions in the field are conflated:

Positions
1962-64 Synthesis of pyrrole compounds, State College
1964-65 Conduct freshman chemistry laboratory, Stanford University
1965-69 Isolation and structure elucidation of alkaloids,
           Stanford University
1969-70    X-ray crystallography, Stanford University
1970-      Research Associate, The Institute

The first four of these positions concern problems undertaken at a
particularly prestigious location, the last is the academic position
eventually obtained through the conversion of previously accumulated
credibility.
  Lists of publications are the main indicators of the strategical
positions occupied by a scientist. Names of coauthors, titles of
articles, journals in which they have been published, and the size of the
Cycles of Credit                                                    211


list together determine the scientist's total value. Once a C.V. has been
read and letters of recommendation received, a decision is made on the
basis of an individual's value whether or not to give tenure, to grant
money, to hire or simply to collaborate on a particular research
programme. The C.V. can thus be compared to the annual budget
report of a corporation.
   The previously accumulated capital of laboratory members was
small because they had published relatively little before becoming part
of the laboratory group. Eleven scientists had published only sixtyseven items between them and half of these resulted from the work of
one individual who had already left the laboratory by the end of our
study. In addition, members of the laboratory had held few academic
positions before coming to the laboratory. All but one had previously
been postdoctoral fellows. In terms of capital, therefore, members of
the laboratory provided more the promise of credibility than an
accumulated stockpile.

                              POSITIONS

   Scientists move from one position to another attempting to occupy
what they regard as the best possible position. It is important to note,
however, that each position simultaneously comprises academic rank
(such as postdoctoral fellow or tenured professor), a situation in the
field (the nature of the problem being tackled and the methods used),
and geographical location (the particular laboratory and the identity of
colleagues). This three-fold notion of position is crucial to an
understanding of scientists' careers. If the analyst does not simultaneously take these three aspects into account he is liable to produce
either a conceptual representation of the field (where problems
generate other problems), or a picture of individuals struggling against
the forces of administration, or a structure of political economy which
focusses on institutions, budgets, and science policies. But the
cohesion of these three aspects will escape his attention.
   The field 11 does not appear full of more or less interesting problems
but for the presence of an individual with ambitions to make some
points. Nevertheless, the individual strategy is nothing but what the
field forces require. The notion of position is thus very complex. It
points to the intersection of individual strategy and field configuration,
but neither the field nor the individual are independent variables. Let
us consider an analogy with war in order to elucidate this point. 12
212                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


    A small earth mound is of no obvious strategical significance in
itself. If, however, a battle takes place in the vicinity, then this mound
may take on a special significance. Although at one time merely part of
a landscape, it is potentially a strategical position. But it only takes on
such significance by virtue of a strategist's evaluation of the battlefield,
the positions of other troops and the relative strength of the combatants.
To one of the combatants, this mound may appear to provide the
opportunity for a successful attack on one line of the enemy. The
mound suddenly makes sense. He becomes excited by what he regards
as an extraordinary opportunity and begins to mobilize the forces at his
disposal. He anticipates that once the mound is transformed in
position he will be able to effect devastating moves against the enemy.
Consequently, he tries to reach and occupy it. The success of his
endeavour depends on the state of play in the rest of the battlefield, on
the strength of his own forces and on his skill in command and in the
evaluation of danger. Once he has reached his objective and transformed the innocent mound into a point d'appui, the pressures of the
battlefield will immediately be modified. Others may try to force him
out. His ability to withstand these pressures depends, once again, on
his past ability, the resources at his disposal (men, weapons, and
munitions), the resources provided by the mound (better visibility,
dominant situation, rocks, etc.), and his skill in using them. A position
is similarly the resultant of a participant's career trajectory, the
situation in the field, the resources at his command and the advantages
of the invested position.
    The above analogy fits closely to scientists' strategies as revealed in
interviews. Scientific activity in our laboratory comprised a field of
contention in which facts were produced, claims dissolved, artefacts
deconstructed, proofs and arguments disproved, careers ruined, and
prestige cut down. This field only existed in so far as it was perceived
by participants. Furthermore, the precise nature of this perception
depended on participants' initial standing. Again and again we were
told: "Then I got interested in this technique, this area, this guy" or "I
 realised the interest of or "I saw an opportunity" and so on.
 Respondents described how they seized a specific method or inscrip-
 tion device and brought it to a particular place where they began to
 make points and to publish. Repeatedly, we heard in interviews that "it
 did not work" or that a respondent "was getting nowhere." Respon-
 dents related how they then drifted until they found an instrument, a
 method, a collaborator or an idea that worked. They were then able
Cycles of Credit                                                      213


quickly to modify the situation in the field. Some statements which
they discredited were never taken up by others. They became strong.
They gained weight. They obtained more funds, attracted more
assistants, generated arguments. The fìeld was modified around their
new position.
   The strategical concept of scientific activity is exemplified by
Guillemin's experience in the field of releasing factors. When he first
entered the field, Guillemin perceived a central problem to be that of
obtaining a reliable bioassay for TRF. Having decided on a strategy,
he mobilized colleagues in the pursuit of such an assay and grasped the
chance opportunity of assistance from a lady whose skill perfectly
matched his goal. He quickly began to obtain reliable data on the basis
of which he shot down a number of existing claims and postulated the
existence of TRF, for which he immediately gained the recognition of
others. Similarly, Dietrich was prevented from mapping the brain
because of the absence of an antibody, the production of which
depended on the isolation of a pure enzyme. As a result he decided to
move to a country to collaborate with researchers who possessed the
enzyme. His move depended almost entirely on the position in which
he wanted to invest.
   It becomes clear that sociological elements such as status, rank,
award, past accreditation, and social situation are merely resources
utilised in the struggle for credible information and increased credibility. It is at best misleading to argue that scientists are engaged, on the
one hand, in the rational production of hard science and, on the other,
in political calculation of assets and investments. On the contrary,
they are strategists, choosing the most opportune moment, engaging in
potentially fruitful collaborations, evaluating and grasping opportunities, and rushing to credited information. In interviews it is not merely
peripheral concerns which excite and interest them. Their political
ability is invested in the heart of doing science. The better politicians
and strategists they are, the better the science they produce.
   It is important to realise, however, that our definition of position is
purely relative. In other words, a position has no meaning without a
field or set of participants' strategies. At the same time, the field itself
is no more than the ensemble of positions as evaluated by a participant.
Moreover, a participant's strategy is meaningless unless located
within a field and in relation to positions as perceived by other
participants.13 The notion of position should not be reified. A position
does not exist "out there," simply waiting for someone to fill it, even
214                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


though this is how it appears to the actor. Indeed, the nature of
positions to be seized is constantly the focus of negotiation in the field.
The feeling that a constraint on taking a position is dependent on the
field is also the upshot of constant negotiation. Positions are only
retrospectively defined as being available for occupation. But this kind
of perception is again only relative to the field in the sense that when we
say "G occupied a position," this is shorthand for our retrospective
understanding of the way in which G determined the configuration of
the field, his resources, and his career. The scientist himself may
retrospectively justify his occupancy of the position in terms of its
interest.14

                            TRAJECTORIES

  The rather monotonous pattern of participants' remarks about
career strategies is a reflection of the monotony of the investment
process:

I studied this problem. I met Dr. Maddox, I developed this technique, I
published this paper, then a position was offered at this place, I met
Sweetzer, we published this paper. I decided to move to this area.

Participants' careers comprise a number of successively occupied
positions. Moves from one position to another can be evaluated by
devising a kind of balance sheet which presents individual careers in
terms of the credit (cultural capital, social capital, operations) with
which they started and the positions in which they invested. The
perceived success of each move and the crude index of impact used in
Chapter 2 (number of citations per paper published after each move)
are also recorded. Each row of the balance sheet thus represents one
move, that is, a change in position (Table 5.1). An individual can thus
move to another laboratory with the same subject and academic status,
or he can stay in the laboratory but change his problem area, or he can
change academic rank without modifying his research programme.
Participants start each move with an initial capital together with their
earnings from previous moves. Since capital can be wasted, individuals' accounts can sometimes go into the red. For example, Sparrow
joined the laboratory with a Ph.D. in biochemistry and letters of
recommendation. These credentials were no better than average.
However, Sparrow's first paper turned out to be an extraordinarily
good investment. He synthesized a releasing factor and received
Cycles of Credit                                                   215




hundreds of citations, largely because the releasing factor related to
particularly sensitive areas of medicine (such as sterility) and because
its synthesis had important implications for birth control. In other
words, a large audience required the use of the newly synthesized
substance in hundreds of experiments. His six coauthors lent him part
of their capital (in the form of instruments, expertise, space, and
credibility) in such a way that his own contribution was difficult to
distinguish. He remained in the same area for four years and continued
to synthesize analogues of the same substance but his efforts met with
diminishing returns. (Up to 1976, he received 0, 0, 10, 4, 3, 2 and 0
citations for each of his subsequent 7 papers.) He then decided to move
21 6                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


to another problem area in order to work on his own. But he did not
realise that most of his capital had resulted from his location and the
demand for the specific releasing factor he had synthesized. As a
result, he suddenly found himself without access to space in the
institute or grant money and with no more personal credibility than
when he started. His attempt to change position corresponded to a
failure to convert his accumulated credibility because the credibility
was not properly his to convert. Subsequently, he was fired by the
institute and tried to exchange his scientific capital for a teaching
position or industrial work in chemistry. This entailed his giving up the
chance of obtaining any further scientific credibility. His movement
out of the credibility cycle amounted to the liquidation of his scientific
investments.
   The importance of location is well illustrated by the trajectory of
scientists who entered the laboratory at the beginning of their careers
and who left after a short while. A comparison of productivity,
measured by number of citations per paper in the three years following
publication, of five scientists reveals marked differences between the
period before, during and after their stay in the laboratory (Table 5.2)
Although all five clearly benefitted from their research in the laboratory,
four of them were unable to reinvest, or cash, their acquired credibility
once they moved away. One obtained a better research position but did
not publish anything which has since been cited and three others had to
liquidate their assets either by teaching, or by going into business. In
terms of credibility, of course, these moves represent poor investments. In terms of money or security, however, there may well have
been a significant payoff. The last of the five obtained a tenured
position in research, partly because he already possessed his own
independent capital. This was sufficient, when taken together with his
stay in the laboratory, to be exchanged for tenure: "There is no doubt
that it helped me tremendously" (IV, 98).

                          GROUP STRUCTURE

   From the point of view of the production of facts, a group can be
thought of as the result of the intertwining of several trajectories.
Group organisation can thus be interpreted in terms of the accumulated moves and investments of its members. The conjunction of
participants' trajectories make up a hierarchy of administrative
positions. Our laboratory group formed an almost perfect administra-
Cycles of Credit                                                  217




tive pyramid. A wide base of fifteen unqualified technicians was
headed by five senior technicians who, in turn, were responsible to
eight professional researchers (Ph.D. holders). These eight comprised
five assistant research professors , two associate research professors,
and one full professor (who was also director).15
   The sociological functions corresponding to these administrative
positions related directly to the part played by each individual in the
process of fact production. We saw in Chapter 2 that the field of
releasing factors is both capital and labour intensive. Thus, information was obtained from a bio- or radio-immunoassay, which typically
occupied several individuals for weeks at a time. We saw in Chapter 3
how some of the difficulties of this kind of work were met by the
accumulation in one place of a large workforce, body of skills, and
equipment. Part of the work was automated by labour-saving machines,
such as the automatic pipette and automatic counters. For the most
part, the technicians were responsible for this work, which provided
data to be used in the arguments of the scientists.
   A technician's status depends on the extent or range of operations
with which he is concerned. Thus, the status of technicians whose job
is merely to wash glassware is significantly lower than those of jobs
entailing responsibility for a complete process, such as the Edmann
degradation method for peptide sequencing, or for an entire inscription
device, such as the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer or a
radioimmunoassay (see Ch. 2). At intermediary status levels, technicians specialise in one or more routine tasks, such as the care of
animals or pipetting.
   This distinction is not always very clear, however, particularly in
cases where technicians assume some of the responsibilities of the
scientists. Bran, for example, a technician whose name appears on
published papers, commented:
218                                                           LABORATORY LIFE


I know more about isolation chemistry than X (a scientist)
[When asked why he was about to leave the group, Bran replied]: I am blocked
here, I guess . . . Yes, I love research. I really love it, and it's why I chose to
come here . . . but I am blocked. I don't have the ability to get a Ph.D.
Q: The ability or the possibility?
A: No the ability . . . to do research you need imagination, originality. . . . I
   cannot reach that level . . . it's extremely crowded, and how could I get a
   Ph.D. here these days . . . it's not the money. I am better payed than
   Y. . . . Also, I guess I don't want to become a super-tech . . . yes, you
   know somebody with a Ph.D. but who does not do any mental work. . . .
   I could see more than a few who are super-techs, here . . . maybe its the
   IQ, I don't have the IQ for doing research; I don't want to struggle for
   years for getting a Ph.D. and after that just being a super-tech (IV, 88).

   Unlike scientists, technicians did not normally possess the initial
capital of credibility (a Ph.D.) which could be used to gain further
credibility. Although technicians were less interested in cashing and
reinvesting scientific credibility than in a salary, they showed an
intense concern for the distribution of credit and for the wording of
acknowledgments. In economic terms, technicians were more akin to
workers rather than investors. Their salary repaid their labour, but it
did not constitute capital which could be invested. This is not to deny
their use of various strategies to better their positions, for example, by
moving to another laboratory. But such moves could never secure
parity with investors who possessed a Ph.D. This is why no less than
five young technicians left the laboratory during our study in order to
follow courses towards a Ph.D. With this initial qualification, technicians expected their work to bring both a salary and an increment in
credibility which could be further invested. 16
   Bran saw "super-techs" as qualified scientists who simply carried
out routine work for others. Indeed, he argued that a Ph.D. would have
been of little use since many of the scientists with Ph.D. s spent most of
their time doing the work of technicians. For Bran, the difference
between a technician and a "super-tech" was insufficient to justify an
investment of several years hard work. What then characterises the
supertechnician Ph.D. holders?
   The citation histories of the eight scientists in the laboratory are
markedly different. Three scientists received an average of 150
citations a year and the remainder received about 50 citations a year.
This difference, between what have been termed "major and minor
leaguers" (Cole and Cole, 1973), is even more striking when we look
Cycles of Credit                                                      219


at the citation spectra of individuals' publications (Figures 5.2a, 5.2b,
and 5.2c). Each spectrum reveals the extent of citation for each
paper cited more than twice in one year. Citation spectra thus indicate
the span of a participant's career, the repartition of effort and success
and the obsolescence of each paper. For example, F's spectrum (not
shown) indicates that he received citations for only one paper. A, on
the other hand, had a healthy spectrum (not shown) even though he
received a relatively small total number of citations. This difference
exemplifies the difference between leaders (major leaguers) and the
supertechnicians (minor leaguers). On average, minor leaguers were
better paid than technicians and they tended to be first authors on papers.
These papers were cited, but this small amount of credibility was insufficient to provide the authors with resources, such as independent space or
grant money. Thus, minor leaguers made points in the literature as well
as producing data. But the production of data usually resulted from decisions taken by major leaguers. Minor leaguers set up complicated bioassays, synthesized peptides and collaborated with others when asked to
do so. This provided them with opportunities to write a paper, but the
main moves were made by those on whose initiative the peptide bioassay
was set up or the collaboration was effected in the first place. Between
 1970 and 1975 the 4 major leaguers wrote 100 papers as first authors and
received 8.3 citations per paper in following years, while the 8 minor
leaguers wrote only 70 papers and received seven citations per paper. 17
   Another key feature of the hierarchy is the extent to which people
are regarded as replaceable. Since the value of information is thought
to depend on its originality, the higher a participant in the hierarchy the
less replaceable he is thought to be. Supertechnicians are seen as less
easily replaceable than good technicians, who are seen as less easy to
replace than routine workers. But the glasswasher and the gardener
can be changed without affecting the process of fact making. For
example, one of the major leaguers commented on the imminent
departure from the laboratory of one of the supertechnicians in the
following way: "of course, we will use a synthetic chemist of some
sort."
   According to this respondent, another individual could fulfill the
function of providing substances just as efficiently as the departing
chemist. At the same time, this respondent regarded her own work
quite differently; but for her presence less new information would have
been produced. 18 It is difficult to account for the careers of the eight
minor leaguers by saying that their investment in a field has been
effective, because supertechnicians work mainly for others and tend
221
222
Cycles of Credit                                                    223

not to effect substantial gains in capital. On the contrary, they are
unable to buy positions or grant money. They can, however, lend their
skill to an investigator, in exchange for a secure position and some
nonmaterial satisfactions. They thus circulate on the market in a similar
way to senior technicians. They are hired, not because of their
originality, but on the recommendation of an investigator for their
reliability in producing certain types of data which are needed by
another investigator in order to make new points.
   The leaders of the laboratory have to create original information.
One of them, the chairman, can hire technicians, and scientists to work
under him. He has sufficient capital of credibility to make unnecessary
its direct reinvestment in bench work. He is a capitalist par excellence,
since he can see his capital increase substantially without having
directly to engage in the work himself. His work is that of full-time
investor. Instead of producing data and making points, he tries to
ensure that research is pursued in potentially rewarding areas, that
credible data are produced, that the laboratory receives the largest
possible share of credit, money and collaboration and that conversions
from one type of credibility to another can occur as swiftly as possible.

                          GROUP DYNAMICS

   In order to understand the dynamics of the group we have to look at
the history of its investments, as reconstructed from curriculum vitae
and interviews. Occasionally, when an anthropologist is lucky enough
to witness the disintegration of a tribe and the subsequent creation of a
new settlement, he can catch a glimpse of those rules of behaviour that
remain hidden during periods of normal activity. By chance, our study
of the laboratory coincided with thè negotiation of a completely new
research contract and with the disbandment of the group. Before
turning to this, however, let us look briefly at the way in which the
group had developed before the time of our study.
   Between 1952 and 1969, C accumulated a large capital of credibility
by occupying a unique position-the releasing factor area. This
position hinged on his suggestion of methods which were still in use
some twenty-five years later, and on his imposition of a certain set of
rigorous standards (Ch. 3). On the basis of this, he was elected to the
Academy of Science, received a series of progressively larger grants
and managed to persuade a chemist (B) with a good career already
behind him to join the group. At the same time, C trained two young
students, who subsequently became his pre- and then post-doctoral
224                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


fellows. The collaboration between C and B paid off in 1969, with the
solution to a structure. This brought the group immense credit. C also
invested substantial effort in the isolation of another substance with
implications for the problem of birth control. At this point the
possibility was raised of setting up a completely new laboratory with
three times more personnel and what was described as "the best
equipment in the world." The potential application of the results of the
kind of research being conducted by C, together with his existing
credibility and the group's success, all made possible a new settlement
at the institute.
   Between 1969 and 1972, the number of citations received by the
group increased. As a result of his work in chemistry, B received
substantial credit and became head of a new laboratory with a team of
three senior chemists. E benefited both from working in a large
physiology group and from the experience as informal leader of a team
of two (and later three) investigators. His work on the mode of actions
and analogs of newly characterised substances increased his standing
in the field. The whole group was organised like an assembly line
producing a series of new structures. The structure of somatostatin
became a fresh source of credibility for the group because, by chance,
its synthesis was found to have important implications for the
treatment of diabetes. Whereas C received a number of awards and
lecture invitations for this work, B and E obtained what they
considered a more important kind of return: credibility. Although C
did little bench work he devoted considerable energy to the exchange
of work done by the others for grant money so as to maintain or enlarge
production activity in the laboratory. Thus, the relationship between C
and the others constituted a kind of "joint account." As C increasingly
became the nationally known figurehead of the group, he did less and
less work on his own, and the number of citations to his papers
decreased (see Fig. 5.3).
   Between 1972 and 1975, the lack of success in producing a new
substance was accompanied by changes in the internal structure of the
group. Several scientists left for opportunities elsewhere. B, for
example, saw his access to work in chemistry limited by the concentration of his skills in one particular research programme. His aptitude to
produce information decreased, as did the number of citations he
received. Unable to renew his capital, he began to see his position
weaken and his status lowered, even though his academic position
remained unchanged. Two of the young supertechnicians, H and G,
adapted easily to the routine of the second research programme (the
225
226                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


production of analogs). They took over responsibility for the production of analogs while still maintaining an auxiliary role in the
work of the physiology section. With his increased credibility, E took
over the physiology section and became to be seen as the official boss
of its operations. A multimillion dollar contract with a federal agency
was drawn up to guarantee laboratory work in diabetes, birth control,
and CNS effects for five years. It was C's signature which made the
contract binding, even though there was tacit understanding that E
would direct the scientific work. At this point, C's capital (in terms of
citations as first author) was at low ebb while E had by far the greatest
(Figure 5.3). E, A, H, and I formed the nucleus of a new group within
the laboratory.
   It was at this time, in 1975, that the present study began, largely as a
result of C's invitation to study epistemology and biology and to see
"the way older scientists leave a group and let younger scientists take
over." But instead of leaving the laboratory in order to further his
position in the credibility circuit, C reinvested his time and energy in
bench work. In the face of many jokes and the total scepticism of his
colleagues, he set to work in amongst the glassware, columns and
bioassays, rather like a new postdoctoral fellow. Obviously, this work
utilised the immense resources of the group. But C carried out the work
on his own. He chose to invest three months work in a problem he
regarded as strategic: the isolation and characterisation of a new
peptide which displays the same activity as opiates. This problem had
already been tackled in other fields, such as pharmacology and
neurobiology. But C decided that by drawing on the resources of the
laboratory, he could solve the problem in three months, using the
classical techniques of isolation chemistry and physiology. According
to C, other investigations of the problem had been uninformed: "These
people do not know what peptide chemistry is." As it happened, he
succeeded in producing the structure in a little more than three months,
despite the fact that his competitors had spent several years on it. This
research effort had profound effects of the group structure. 19 The new
substance, which could then be produced in large quantities (by virtue

closely to changes in group structure as revealed by interviews. Especially striking is C's comeback after 1 9 7 5 , the slow elimination of B, E's
continuous ascension, and the lingering difference between the "big
shots" and the "minor leaguers." However, it is only by combining this
diagram with the individual spectra that a full idea of a career can be
provided.
Cycles of Credit                                                       227


of the second research programme, (see pp. 61ff), was of great
significance both for pharmacology and brain chemistry, which were
then boom areas, and for problems of drug addiction and mental
illness. Because these enormous interests were at stake, C's position
was completely transformed in the space of six months. In September
1975, he was an old "has been" who wanted to retire. By the following
March he was the most sought after member of the group, not because
of his past prestige, but because of his fresh credibility in the new field.
The dramatic increase in C's citations in 1976 (Fig. 5.3) was entirely
due to his new work.
   This new move completely disrupted the existing contract by which
C obtained the rewards, but the others gained credibility. At the same
time, discovery of the new substance established a much stronger link
between brain study and endocrinology than had releasing factors,
despite the greater interest of the latter for endocrinologists as
compared to neurologists. The new substance aroused intense interest
among brain scientists, especially those newly established in a nearby
laboratory. Thus, on the basis of only a few months' work, C found
himself admirably positioned in a new field. B and E, on the other
hand, found themselves in a rut. They continued to write papers on
classical releasing factors with progressively diminishing returns (Fig.
5.2b and c). C no longer wished to retire, finding himself in a position
similar to that at the start of the TRF story.
   This example of a sudden change in position highlights the sense in
which credit and reward are important to scientists. C invested all his
credit as resources in a new area. Largely by means of telephone
contact with a number of other laboratories he launched large-scale
investigations, exchanged substances, sera, and new data within the
newly defined subfield. By virtue of his contacts with Parine (see p.
 196) he became a member of an entirely distinct invisible college.
Other research efforts in the group were eclipsed by the spectacular
success of the new substances. Equipment and technicians were
increasingly mobilized to assist in the new task. C and others realised
that the entire laboratory capacity could easily be invested in an area
potentially much more rewarding than releasing factors. However, A
began increasing his investment in a set of new substances of only
marginal significance for the main programme, in an attempt quickly to
increase his returns. The corporation was breaking up. A new contract
had to be defined. 20
   By comparison with the issue of production strategy, factors such as
personality or the "point d'honneur" played a relatively minor part in
228                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


the long series of conflicts which accompanied the break up of the
group. For five years, the group had existed on the basis of an
agreement between three senior investors to work on the same problem
at a time when this represented a highly efficient means of subscribing
to a given paradigm. With a change in both the field and individual
strategies, however, the situation had to be modified. The equipment,
money, and authority which made up the dead capital of the laboratory
had to be redistributed. B was eliminated and bankrupt. F and A formed
a new group with their supertechnicians H and I. Their problem was to
decide how and where this new group could settle. The credibility of
this new group attracted good offers (chairmanship, lab space,
endowment) from several parts of the country even though none of
these matched the situation in the laboratory before the success of C's
changed strategy. For his part, C felt sufficiently confident in his
ability to acquire new capital that he could envisage being left by the
group from whom he had obtained his past credit and starting again
with a new group of young postdoctorates.
   The complexity of the relations between the members of the group
and of their appraisal of the definition of credit, became particularly
clear once the group had actually split.21 C was compared to a
capitalist in that his full-time activity was to manage his capital and not
to work directly to produce credible data. As we have seen, however,
his hired hands were also investors in the same market. They could
thus become direct competitors of C. This is exactly what happened. E
decided to cash his credibility. Quite unexpectedly, he found his
credibility sufficient to secure from the same institution a grant
enabling him to equip a laboratory exactly similar to the one in which
he had been working. He then became head of a group, hired his own
staff and secured around him the same equipment that C had before. In
economic terms he founded a rival business and employed H, I, A, and
most of C's technicians. Figures 5.2c and 5.3 show E's citation curve
(together with the newcomer A, and the supertechnician H) to be
regularly ascending. B's situation was very different. He was unable to
cash any credibility within the field and was forced like Sparrow, to
liquidate his assets and go into teaching (Fig. 5.2b). C was left with a
large amount of dead capital (in terms of equipment), a little money,
but no workforce. He now had to find a new source of points to make in
order to activate the mass of former investments incorporated in the
laboratory.
Cycles of Credit                                                      229

   The production of credible data, as we have seen, is one way of
activating the credibility cycle and of setting in motion the "business of
science" or, as Foucault (1978) puts it, "the political economics of
truth." Later, scientists may strive to cash credibility in their own
name. They may thus say they "have had ideas" (pp. 169ff), that it is
"their" laboratory, and that is they who have managed to attract
money and equipment in the interests of securing the basis for their
operations. From this point of view, they are not unlike businessmen.
At the same time, however, they are merely employees of the federal
government. No matter how extensive, their scientific capital can
neither be sold nor bequeathed and only rarely can it be exchanged for
monetary capital. As craftsmen working to produce their own data,
they are concerned more or less exclusively with their own accounts.
But if they are not careful, they can end up as employees or
supertechnicians. It is also possible, however, that they can become
independent, and with luck, employers themselves. At the same time,
they themselves remain employees, in the sense that they are payed to
manage the loan of private or taxpayer money which is lent them. The
scientists we observed were thus caught between two overlapping
economical cycles: they constantly had to manage their capital in
order to get things going; but at the same time they had to justify their
use of the money and confidence which they had borrowed.
   In a successful laboratory there is likely to be constant excitement
about finding new statements, proving them, extending their influence,
setting up new instruments, cashing credibility, and reinvesting it. The
tension of a battalion headquarters at war, or of an executive room in a
period of crisis does not compare with the atmosphere of a laboratory
on a normal day! This tension is directed towards the secretaries in
efforts to persuade them to type manuscripts in time and towards the
technicians to effect the rapid order of animals and supplies and to the
careful execution of routine assay work. Of course, similar pressures
can be found in any production unit. More unusual here is that these
pressures force investigators to be credible. On one hand, scientists
withstand the constraints of an investor who is continually obliged to
reinvest if he does not want to lose his capital. On the other hand,
scientists suffer the constraints of an employee constantly required to
account for the money lent him. By virtue of this double system of
pressures, our scientists remained trapped in the laboratory. If a
scientist stopped doing new experiments, occupying new positions,
hiring new investigators, and generating new statements, he would
230                                                              LABORATORY LIFE


very quickly become a "has been." His grant money would be stopped,
and, save for any tenured position or niche he had previously
established for himself, he would be wiped out of the game. It is
possible to explain his behaviour in terms of "norms" or the quest for
recognition, but it may not be necessary. Economic forces tie down the
researcher both as an independent capitalist and as an employee; in
this position it is easy enough to squeeze him so as to extract a fact. 22



                                     NOTES
      1. In this chapter we use loosely structured interviews (many of them taperecorded), publication lists, curricula vitae, grant proposals, and other documents
provided by participants. Valuable data were also obtained through participation in
some of the conflicts and dynamics of the group. Our explicit treatment of individual
career choices in this chapter has necessitated our taking various precautions, such as
changing names, dates, initials, sex and substances on which researchers work in order
to protect the anonymity of those concerned.
      2. Even in the small group studied here, the representations of the world, or
ideologies, differ markedly. Although we did not study these systematically, we payed
attention to what Althusser (1974) calls the "spontaneous philosophy of scientists";
one had a typically positivistic representation of science borrowed from Claude Bernard
(1865); another had a mystical view of science and linked his work to a fundamentalist
approach to religion; a third had a business-like view of his activity and held to the
epistemology of a nouveau riche; a fourth worked with an economical model of
investments; the fifth of the senior members is quoted here.
      3. A major problem of this programme is the pressure exerted by informants on the
observer to acquire the information they think he wants to hear. This is why we heard so
many stories about the politics of the laboratory and why we decided not to use such
stories. Behind these stories were very clear strategies of investments, the presence of
the observer being used as a resource by which members could determine investments
and the nature of others' reactions.
      4. Much of this discussion draws heavily on the work of Bourdieu (1972; 1977).
The reason for this is simple: economic analyses of science have limited themselves to a
consideration of large-scale factors, even when carried out by Marxists like Bernal
(1939), Sohn Rethel (1975), and Young (no date). Only by introducing the notion of symbolic capital (of which economic capital is only a subset), it is possible to apply economic
arguments to noneconomic behaviour (Bourdieu, 1977). See also Knorr (1978) and
Bourdieu (1975b) for a direct application to science.
      5. Another example of conversion can be found in Hoagland's reminiscences:

       At Harvard, Gregory Pincus and I had received our Ph.D. degrees in 1927 and
       had become warm friends. He had remained as an assistant professor in
       Crozier's department after I left, but after two 3-year terms his appointment was
       not renewed despite his brilliant work. I was eager to have him join me at Clark
Cycles of Credit                                                                     231

       and together we raised sufficient funds from various outside sources to make it
       possible for him to come as a visiting professor. By 1936 he had published his
       book, The Eggs of Mammals, and also a number of papers which reported for the
       first time successful pathogenesis in a mammal, i.e., rabbits that had mothers but
       no fathers. This received much attention from both the scientific and lay press,
       but it was met by less than enthusiasm by some conservative members of the
       University. I found Pincus' interest and knowledge of steroid hormones exciting.
       He had already developed improved methods of determining urinary steroids
       and applied these to endocrine problems (Meites et al., 1975).

       Each sentence relates the conversion between one form of credibility and
another. Thus we read how diplomas, social relationships, positions, money, credit,
interests, and convictions interchanged. Hoagland did not simply reward his friend
Pincus. Rather, he needed his techniques and his ideas and so backed them and tried to
convince others to fund the venture.
     6. One main advantage of the notion of cycle, is that it frees us from the necessity
of specifying the ultimate motivation behind the social activity which is observed. More
precisely, one might suggest that it is the formation of an endless cycle which is
responsible for the extraordinary success of science. Marx's (1867: Ch. 4) comments
on the sudden conversion from use value to exchange value, could well apply to the
scientific production of facts. The reason so many statements are produced is that each
is without use value, but has an exchange value which enables conversion and
accelerates the reproduction of the credibility cycle. This view also has implications
for the so-called relations between science and industry (Latour, 1976).
     7. This is typical of the double standard of some analysts of science. When a
businessman gives up and sells a bankrupt company, this is taken as an obvious
manifestation of greed and interested motives. However, when a scientist gives up a
dying area or a discredited hypothesis (which means that no one is going to "buy" the
argument any more), this is considered as an indication of conformity to the ethos of
scientific disinterestedness.
     8. As noted earlier, the laboratory chosen for our study was characterised by an
almost pathological concern for credit. It became clear, however, that the ''point
d'honneur" of credit receipt was not itself at stake Because of the modification of the
field, each participant adopted different strategies: the struggle concerned, not credit
but space, research programmes, and equipment. As long as they agreed on these
points, there was little quarrel about who received credit. When they differed on these
points, the tangible focus of conflict was a bitter argument about credit sharing.
     9. This comparison is viable in so far as the notion of economics is not restricted to
the circulation of money. It should be extended instead to all activities permeated by the
existence of a valueless capital, the sole purpose of which is accumulation and
expansion. This differs from the efforts of the Chicago School to portray activities in
economic terms even where no capital is involved. The link between the scientific
production of facts and modern capitalist economics is probably much deeper than a
mere relation.
   10. A related problem is the extent to which the scientists' activities we portray are
conscious and explicit strategies. This is a problem we cannot resolve in abstract
because each scientist is also engaged in a debate to make logical, explicit, or necessary
his career's choices. We do not wish to say that scientists are "really" interested
232                                                             LABORATORY LIFE


although they do now avow it, or that they are "really" determined by the field although
they think they have some freedom and merit in having chosen this or that way. We
leave questions like the notion of motivations entirely open to psychologists and
historians. Some scientists try to show that it was their conscious decision to choose this
subject, while simultaneously arguing that a colleague could not do otherwise because
the time was ripe. On another occasion the same informant may try to persuade you that
he was not conscious at all and that it was some kind of artistic intuition, only to inform
you a few days later that the whole thing was quite logical and that he did not have much
choice. This consideration is important because we certainly do not wish to propose a
model of behaviour in which individuals make calculations in order to maximize their
profits. This would be Benthamian economics. The question of the calculation of
resources, of maximisation, and of the presence of the individual are so constantly
moving that we cannot take them as our points of departure.
    11. The word field is used here simultaneously to denote the sense of a scientific
field and to convey the idea of an "agonistic field." In this second sense, "field"
(Bourdieu's term in French is "champ") denotes the effect on an individual of all others'
moves and claims rather than a structure or an organisation. In this way it is not
dissimilar to the sense of a magnetic field or to similar uses in physics (magnetic fields,
field theory, and so on).
    12. Our use of a battlefield analogy is perhaps warranted both by the term field and
by the frequent use of military metaphors by scientists themselves (see for example, Ch.
3, p. 130). Although we provide no quantitative evidence, our impressions are that the
most frequent use of metaphors in the laboratory was firstly epistemological ("proof,"
"argument," "convincing," and so on), secondly, economic, thirdly, battlefield
analogies, and finally psychological ("pleasure," "efforts," and "passions").
     13. As recently argued by Bourdieu at a Paris symposium, the notion of field is
understandable only if one takes into account that the nature of motivations, the
existence of participants, and the constraints of the field are all themselves at stake in
the field. Our argument should in no way be construed as an attempt to resuscitate a
structuralist position. An introduction to this debate can be gained from Knorr ( 1978),
Gallon (1975), and Latour and Fabbri (1977).
     14. In one sense, this entire chapter can be taken as commentary on the frequent
utterance of our participants: "That's interesting" (see Davis, 1971).
     15. The group of technicians has a high turnover; they are nonunionised and have
no long-term contracts; their salaries ranges from $8,000 to $15,000; junior doctorates
with no contracts are paid between $12,00 and $20,000; assistant professors with
contracts are paid approximately $25,000; associate professors with tenure are paid
approximately $40,000. The salary of the head of the group, who has tenure and some
power over the space, is unknown. Thus, the salaries are not strikingly different from
those in nonscientific companies. More importantly, participants' salaries are insufficient to enable the accumulation of money capital comparable to scientific capital.
     16. Seven technicians were interviewed (three tape-recorded) just before they left
the laboratory. Their importance in the production of facts is usually underestimated.
However, since our main concern is the credibility cycle rather than other more general
aspects of laboratory life, we shall not use this interview material here.
     17. This difference would be larger but for the generous policy of allowing minor
leaguers to assume first authorship.
Cycles of Credit                                                                        233


     18 As we mentioned earlier, the struggle for originality is at the heart of fact
production. Thus, for participants, the question "How original am I" was the same as
''How valuable is my information "
     19. Thanks to the SCI (Small, private communication) we are able to confirm that
as early as 1977, C was part of a "cluster" with which none of the classical members of
neuroendocrinology was associated.
     20 This was the situation up until 1977 See below
     2 1. This is based on a very brief round of follow-up interviews carried out in 1978.
The results of events in the recent past is a substantial change in those characteristics of
the laboratory described in Chapter 2. Most of the equipment is still there, but only two
of the old participants remain More importantly, although the laboratory was originally
fitted out for the production of certain types of fact, it now appears that a rival laboratory
is about to flood the market with facts constructed along similar lines. The question for
participants is how the equipment described in Chapter 2 can be used in different ways
and in different areas. For reasons of space, we are unable to relate these developments
in detail. Suffice it to note that the object of our study was a very unusual fit between a
group, space, equipment, and a set of problems. The particular situation which allowed
us to see many features of fact construction was extremely unusual and may not be
repeated.
     22 Scientists' final realisation of capital, through their movement into clinical
studies, industry, and culture, is not examined here. It is clear, nonetheless, that the sum
of investments in the credibility cycle requires eventual justification This is evident, for
example, in scientists' presentation of grant proposals.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 6




THE CREATION OF ORDER OUT OF DISORDER




In examining the construction of facts in a laboratory, we have
presented the general organisation of the setting as constituted by
someone unfamiliar with science (Chapter 2); we showed how the
history of some of the laboratory's achievements could be used to
explain the stabilisation of a "hard" fact (Chapter 3); we then analysed
some of the microprocesses by which facts are constructed, looking
especially at the paradox of the term fact (Chapter 4); we then turned
to the individuals in the laboratory in an attempt to make sense both of
their careers and the solidity of their production (Chapter 5 ). In each of
these chapters we defined terms which were often in contradistinction
with those used by scientists, historians, epistemologists, and sociologists of science. We shall now summarise the various findings of these
preceding chapters in an attempt more systematically to link the
different concepts used. At the same time, we shall review some of the
methodological problems encountered so far. It will not have escaped
the reader's notice, for example, that a major problem arises from our
contention that scientific activity comprises the construction and
sustenance of fictional accounts which are sometimes transformed
into stabilised objects. If this is the case, what is the status of our own
constructed account of scientific activity?
                                                                      235
236                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


   In the first section of this chapter we summarise the argument so far.
Instead of simply following the presentation of the preceding chapters,
however, we identify six main concepts used throughout and show
briefly how they are related. This leads us to the second section. Here
we introduce one further notion, the concept of order from disorder,
which enables us to situate our argument in the more general
framework of sociology of science. Finally, in the third section, we
compare our own account with those of the scientists whose activity we
claim to have understood.

Creating a Laboratory: The Main Elements of Our Argument
   The first concept used in our argument is that of construction.
(Knorr, in press). Construction refers to the slow, practical craftwork
by which inscriptions are superimposed and accounts backed up or
dismissed. It thus underscores our contention that the difference
between object and subject or the difference between facts and
artefacts should not be the starting point of the study of scientific
activity; rather, it is through practical operations that a statement can
be transformed into an object or a fact into an artefact. In the course of
Chapter 3, for instance, we followed the collective construction of a
chemical structure, and showed how, after eight years of bringing
inscription devices to bear on the purified brain extracts, the statement
stablilised sufficiently to enable it to switch into another network. It
was not simply that TRF was conditioned by social forces, rather it
was constructed by and constituted through microsocial phenomena.
In Chapter 4, we showed how statements are constantly modalised and
demodalised in the course of conversations at the laboratory bench.
Argument between scientists transforms some statements into figments of one's subjective imagination, and others into facts of nature.
The constant fluctuation of statements' facticity allowed us approximately to describe the different stages in the construction of facts, as if
a laboratory was a factory where facts were produced on an assembly
line. The démystification of the difference between facts and artefacts
was necessary for our discussion (at the end of Chapter 4) of the way in
which the term fact can simultaneously mean what is fabricated and
what is not fabricated. By observing artefact construction, we showed
that reality was the consequence of the settlement of a dispute rather
that its cause. Although obvious, this point has been overlooked by
many analysts of science, who have taken the difference between fact
and artefact as given and miss the process whereby laboratory
scientists strive to make it a given. 1
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                 237


   The second main concept which we have used constantly, is that of
agonistic (Lyotard, 1975). If facts are constructed through operations
designed to effect the dropping of modalities which qualify a given
statement, and, more importantly, if reality is the consequence rather
than the cause of this construction, this means that a scientist's activity
is directed, not toward "reality," but toward these operations on
statements. The sum total of these operations is the agonistic field. The
notion of agonistic contrasts significantly with the view that scientists
are somehow concerned with "nature." Indeed, we have avoided
using nature throughout our argument, except in showing that one of its
current components, namely the structure of TRF, has been created
and incorporated in our view of the body. Nature is a usable concept
only as a by-product of agonistic activity. 2 It does not help explain
scientists' behaviour. An advantage of the notion of agonistic is that it
both incorporates many characteristics of social conflict (such as
disputes, forces, and alliance) and explains phenomena hitherto
described in epistemological terms (such as proof, fact, and validity).
Once it is realised that scientists' actions are oriented toward the
agonistic field, there is little to be gained by maintaining the distinction
between the "politics" of science and its "truth"; as we showed in
Chapters 4 and 5, the same "political" qualities are necessary both to
make a point and to out-manoeuvre a competitor.
   An agonistic field is in many ways similar to any other political
field of contention. Papers are launched which transform statement
types. But the many positions which already make up the field
influence the likelihood that a given argument will have an effect. An
operation may or may not be successful depending on the number of
people in the field, the unexpectedness of the point, the personality and
institutional attachment of the authors, the stakes,3 and the style of the
paper. This is why scientific fields do not display the orderly pattern
with which some analysts of science like to contrast the disorderly
tremors of political life. The field of neuroendocrinology thus comprises a multitude of claims and many substances exist only locally.
For example, MSH releasing factor exists only in Louisiana, Argentina,
and one place in Canada, and in one other in France; most of the
associated literature was considered meaningless by our informants. 4
The negotiations as to what counts as a proof or what constitues a good
assay are no more or less disorderly than any argument between
lawyers or politicians. 5
238                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


   Our use of agonistic is not meant to imply any especially wicked or
dishonest character attribute of scientists. Although scientists' interaction can appear antagonistic, it is never concerned solely with
psychological or personal evaluations of competitors. The solidity of
the argument is always central to the dispute. But the constructed
character of this solidity means that the agonistic necessarily plays
a part in deciding which argument is the more persuasive. Neither
agonistic nor construction have been used in our argument as a way of
undermining the solidity of scientific facts; the reason for our nonrelativist use of these terms will be clear in our discussion of the third main
concept used in our argument.
   We have insisted on the importance of the material elements of the
laboratory in the production of facts. For instance, in Chapter 2 we
demonstrated how the very existence of the objects of study depended
on the accumulation inside the laboratory walls of what Bachelard has
called "phenomenotechnique.'' But this allows us only to describe the
equipment of the group at one point in time. At some earlier point, each
item of equipment had been a contentious set of arguments in a
neighbouring discipline. Consequently, one cannot take for granted
the difference between "material" equipment and "intellectual" components of laboratory activity: the same set of intellectual components
can be shown to become incorporated as a piece of furniture a few
years later. In the same way, the long and controversial construction of
TRF was eventually superceded by the appearance of TRF as a
noncontroversial material component in other assays. Similarly, we
briefly indicated, at the end of Chapter 5, how investments made
within the laboratory were eventually realised in clinical studies and in
drug industries. In order to emphasise the importance of the time
dimension, we shall refer to the above process as materialisation, or
reification (Sartre, 1943). Once a statement stabilises in the agonistic
field, it is reified and becomes part of the tacit skills or material
equipment of another laboratory. 6 We shall return later to this point.
   The fourth concept upon which we have drawn is that of credibility
(Bourdieu, 1976). We used credibility to define the various investments made by scientists and the conversions between different
aspects of the laboratory. Credibility facilitates the synthesis of
 economic notions (such as money, budget, and payoff) and epistemological notions (such as certitude, doubt, and proof). Moreover, it
emphasises that information is costly. The cost-benefit analysis
applies to the type of inscription devices to be employed, the career of
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                   239


scientists concerned, the decisions taken by funding agencies, as well
as to the nature of the data, the form of paper, the type of journal, and to
readers' possible objections. The cost itself varies according to the
previous investments in terms of money, time, and energy already
made.7 The notion of credibility permits the linking of a string of
concepts, such as accreditation, credentials and credit to beliefs
("credo," "credible") and to accounts ("being accountable," "counts,"
and "credit accounts"). This provides the observer with an homogeneous view of fact construction and blurs arbitrary divisions between
economic, epistemological, and psychological factors.8
   The fifth concept used in our argument, albeit somewhat programmatically, is that of circumstances (Serres, 1977). Circumstances
(that which stands around) have generally been considered irrelevant
to the practice of science.9 Our argument could be summarised as an
attempt to demonstrate their relevance. Our claim is not just that TRF
is surrounded, influenced by, in part depends on, or is also caused by
circumstances; rather, we argue that science is entirely fabricated out
of circumstance; moreover, it is precisely through specific localised
practices that science appears to escape all circumstances. Although
this has already been demonstrated by some sociologists (for example,
Collins, 1974; Knorr, 1978; Woolgar, 1976), the concept of circumstances has also been developed from a philosophical perspective by
Serres (1977). Chapter 2 is an analysis of the circumstances which
make stable objects possible in neuroendocrinology; Chapter 3 shows
in which networks TRF is able to circulate outside the laboratory in
which it was originally constructed; at the end of Chapter 4 we record
how the same holds true for the extension of somatostatin. We also
point out in Chapter 4 how daily conversations constantly feature local
or idiosyncratic circumstances. Finally, in Chapter 5, we use the
notion of positions in order to account for the circumstancial character
of careers. Rather than being a structure or an ordered pattern, a field
consists only of positions which influence each other in a way which is
not itself orderly (see pp. 211ff). The notion of position enables us to talk
about the "right" time, or the "right" assay, or in Habermas's (1971)
terms, to replace the historicity in science (Knorr, 1978).
   The sixth and final concept upon which we have drawn is noise (or,
more exactly, the ratio of signal to noise), which is borrowed from
information theory (Brillouin, 1962). Its application to an understanding of scientific activity is not new (Brillouin, 1964; Singh, 1966;
Atlan, 1972), but our usage is very metaphorical. We have not, for
240                                                    LABORATORY LIFE


example, attempted to calculate the signal to noise ratio produced by
the laboratory. But we have retained the central idea that information
is measured against a background of equally probable events, or as
Singh (1966) puts it:

   We measure the information content of a message in any given ensemble
   of messages by the logarithm of the probability of its occurrence. This
   way of defining information has an earlier precedent in statistical
   mechanics where the measure of entropy is identical in form with that of
   information (Singh, 1966: 73).

The concept of noise fits closely with our observations of participants
busily reading the written tracts of inscription devices (see Chapter 2,
pp. 48ff). The notion of equally probable alternatives also allowed us to
 describe the final construction of TRF in Chapter 3: the import of mass
spectrometry delimited the number of probable statements. In Chapter
5, the notion of demand, which allowed us to develop the idea of a
market for information and to permit the operation of the credibility
cycle, was based on the premise that any decrease in the noise of one
participant's operation enhances the ability of another participant to
decrease noise elsewhere.
   The result of the construction of a fact is that it appears unconstructed
by anyone; the result of rhetorical persuasion in the agnostic field is
that participants are convinced that they have not been convinced; the
result of materialisation is that people can swear that material
considerations are only minor components of the "thought process";
the result of the investments of credibility, is that participants can
claim that economics and beliefs are in no way related to the solidity of
science; as to the circumstances, they simply vanish from accounts,
being better left to political analysis than to an appreciation of the hard
and solid world of facts! Although it is unclear whether this kind of
inversion is peculiar to science, 10 it is so important that we have
devoted much of our argument to specifying and describing the very
moment at which inversion occurs.
    Having summarised the main arguments of the preceding chapters,
it is important now to show how they are related because the concepts
above have been borrowed from several different fields.
    Let us start with the concept of noise. For Brillouin, information is a
relation of probability; the more a statement differs from what is
expected, the more information it contains. It follows that a central
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                               241


question for any participant advocating a statement in the agonistic
field is how many alternative statements are equally probable. If a
large number can easily be thought of, the original statement will be
taken as meaningless and hardly distinguishable from others. If the
others seem much less likely than the original statement, the latter will
stand out and be taken as a meaningful contribution.11 When a
laboratory member reads a peak on an amino acid analyser, for
example (Photograph 9), he first needs to ascertain whether or not he
can convince himself (or others)12 that the peak is different from the
background noise. As we have seen, this depends in part on his
colleagues. If his claim, "look at this peak," meets with the response,
"there is no peak, it is simply noise, you might just as well say that the
peak is this little blurr at the other side" (see Photograph 8), his
statement has no informative value (in this context).
   The sentence which threatens to dissolve all statements (and
careers) takes the conditional form: ''but you might as well say that it
is . . . " and precedes a list of equally probable statements. The
outcome of this formulation is often the dissolution of the statement in
noise. So the objective of the game is to carry out all possible
manoeuvres which might force the scientist (or colleagues) to admit
that alternative statements are not equally plausible. We discussed
some of the manouevres in Chapters 3 and 4. One common manoeuvre
is that of construction. By showing colleagues, two, rather than one,
peaks of an amino acid analysis, or by increasing the distance between
the peak and base line, the difference between the various possible
statements will also be increased. By being sufficiently convincing,
people will stop raising objections altogether, and the statement will
move toward a fact-like status. Instead of being a figment of one's
imagination (subjective), it will become a "real objective thing," the
existence of which is beyond doubt. 13
   The operation of information construction, then, transforms any set
of equally probable statements into a set of unequally probable
statements. At the same time, this operation draws upon the activities
of persuasion (agonistic) and of writing (construction) in order to
increase the signal to noise ratio.
   How can inequality be introduced into a set of equally probable
statements in such a way that a statement is taken to be more probable
than all the alternatives? The technique most frequently used by our
scientists was that of increasing the cost for others to raise equally
probable alternatives. In Chapter 3, for example, we showed that the
242                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


imposition of new standards on the field of releasing factors effectively
ruined competitors' efforts. Similarly, when Burgus used mass spectrometry to make a point, he made it difficult to raise alternative
possibilities because to do so would be to contest the whole of physics.
Once a slide has been shown with all the lines of the spectrum
corresponding to one atom of the amino acid sequence, no one is likely
to stand up and object.14 The controversy is settled. But if a slide is
presented which shows the spots of a thin-layer chromatography, ten
chemists will stand up and assert that "this is not a proof." The
difference, in the second case, is that any chemist can easily find fault
in the method used (but see the Donohue episode, p. 171).
   This point would clearly be tautological but for the central notion of
materialisation or reification which we defined earlier and can now
use at its best. The mass spectrometer is the reified part of a whole field
of physics; it is an actual piece of furniture which incorporates the
majority of an earlier body of scientific activity. The cost of disputing
the generated results of this inscription device has been enormous.
Indeed, this explains by Guillemin and Burgus strived from the beginning
to "get at the mass spectrometer." In the case of thin layer chromatography, however, very little earlier interpretative work has been reified.
Consequently, it is easy to contest any step in arguments based on a
Chromatograph and to propose an alternative argument. Once a large
number of earlier arguments have become incorporated into a black
box,15 the cost of raising alternatives to them becomes prohibitive. It is
unlikely, for example, that anyone will contest the wiring of the
computer shown in Photograph 11, or the statistics on which the "t"
test is based, or the name of the vessels in the pituitary.
   The operation of black-boxing is made possible by the availability of
credibility (Ch. 5). As we argued earlier, credibility is a part of the
wider phenomenon of credit, which refers to money, authority,
confidence and, also marginally, to reward. The first question raised
when a statement is proposed, is how much the statement and/or its
author can be credited. This question is directly analogous to the
question of cost mentioned above: what sort of investments should be
made so as to fabricate a statement of equal probability to that of a
competitor? In a million-dollar business like the sequencing of TRF,
the chances are that no alternative statement is feasible. The constraints are such that no investment could possibly match those
already made. Consequently, statements which are already credited
will be taken for granted. In addition, they will be used to make points
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                    243

in other laboratories. This is the nature of the market defined in
Chapter 5. No matter whether this taken-for-granted peptidic structure takes the form of a nonproblematic argument or of a white powder
sample, the only important question is whether borrowing it (or buying
it) will make it more difficult for a competitor to contest statements.
   Of course, the concepts of cost, reification, and credit have to be
understood in the light of our earlier argument: everything which has
been accepted, no matter for what reason, will be reified so as to
increase the cost of raising objections. For instance, the standing of
one scientist might be such that when he defines a problem as
important, no one feels able to object that it is a trivial question;
consequently, the field may be moulded around this important
question, and funds will be readily forthcoming. In the Donohue
episode, chemists' preference for the enol form for the four DNA bases
was stabilised and reified in textbooks, such that it was more difficult
for Watson to doubt it or simply to object that the keto form was
equally probable. The cost-benefit analysis will vary according to the
prevailing circumstances, so no general rules can be established. The
style of an article can make it more difficult for the reader not to believe
in it; the qualification of statements can disarm readers' objections; for
another audience, documentation through the use of footnotes can add
conviction; competitors can even be silenced by imprisonment or fraud
(Lecourt, 1976). The major rule of the game is to assess the cost of
investments compared with their likely return; the game is not played
according to a set of ethical rules, which a superficial examination
reveals. 16
   The portrayal resulting from the above combination of concepts
used throughout our argument has one central feature: the set of
statements considered too costly to modify constitute what is referred
to as reality. Scientific activity is not "about nature," it is a fierce fight
to construct reality. The laboratory is the workplace and the set of
productive forces, which makes construction possible. Every time a
statement stabilises, it is reintroduced into the laboratory (in the guise
of a machine, inscription device, skill, routine, prejudice, deduction,
programme, and so on), and it is used to increase the difference
between statements. The cost of challenging the reified statement is
impossibly high. Reality is secreted.17
   So far we have summarized the main points of our argument by
showing how six of the major concepts we have used are related and,
finally, by zooming in on the notion of laboratory from which we
244                                                LABORATORY LIFE


started in the second chapter. There is, however, an alternative way of
describing laboratory life which draws primarily on one single
concept.

Order From Disorder
  The transformation of a set of equally probable statements into a set
of unequally probable statements amounts to the creation of order
(Brillouin, 1962; Costa de Beauregard, 1963; Atlan, 1972). Let us
now provide a new account of laboratory life using the notion of order
together with Brillouin's famous mythical character: Maxwell's demon.
The simplest version is the following (Singh, 1966):
  A demon placed in a cold oven would be able to increase the amount of
heat by allowing the swifter molecules to gather in one part of the oven
and by keeping them there. In order to do this, the demon needs
information about the state of the molecules, a small trap which will let
them come or go depending on their quality, and an enclosure in which
to prevent the sorted molecules from escaping and returning to their
random state. We now know that the demon himself consumes a small
amount of energy in doing his work. "It is impossible to get something
for nothing, even information," as the saying goes.
   This account provides an illuminating analogy with what goes on in
the laboratory. We have already seen the laboratory to be an enclosure
where previous work is gathered. What would happen if this enclosure was opened? Imagine that the following experiment was
carried out by our observer. Entering the deserted laboratory at night,
he opens one of the large refrigerators shown in Photograph 2. As we
know, each sample on the racks corresponds to one stage of the
purification process and is labelled with a long code number which
refers back to the protocol books. Taking each sample in turn, the
observer peels off the labels, throws them away and returns the naked
samples to the refrigerator. Next morning, he would doubtless witness
scenes of extreme confusion. No one would be able to tell which
sample was which. It would take up to five, ten, and even fifteen years
(the time it took to label the samples) to replace the labels-unless, of
course, chemistry techniques had advanced in the mean time. As we
stated earlier, any sample might equally well be any other. In other
words, the disorder, or more precisely the entropy, of the laboratory
would have increased: anything could be said about each and every
sample. This nightmarish experiment highlights the importance of the
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                245

trapping system for any competent Maxwell's demon wishing to
decrease disorder.18
   At this point, we can perhaps do justice to the apparently strange
notion of inscription introduced in Chapter 2. Our argument there was
that writing was not so much a method of transferring information as a
material operation of creating order. Let us illustrate the importance of
writing by reference to an experiment undertaken by the observer
during his stay in the laboratory. As we mentioned in Chapter 1, the
sociologist worked as a technician during his participant observation.
Fortunately for us, the observer turned out to be an extremely bad
technician in a very efficient laboratory. Consequently, his deficiencies highlighted the roots of his informants' competence. One of the
most difficult tasks was the dilution and addition of doses to the
beakers. He had to remember in which beaker he had to put the doses,
and made a note, for example, that he had to put dose 4 in beaker 12.
But he found that he had forgotten to make a note of the time interval.
With pipette half lifted, he found himself wondering whether he had
already put dose 4 in beaker 12. He blushed, trying to remember
whether he had made a note before or after the actual action took place;
obviously, he had not made a note of when he had made a note! He
panicked and pushed the piston of the pasteur pipette into beaker 12.
But maybe he had now put twice the dose into the beaker. If so, the
reading would be wrong. He crossed out the figure. The observer's lack
of training meant that he continued in this fashion. Not surprisingly,
the resulting points exhibited wide scatter. A day's work had been lost.
It is necessary to be a technician, and an incompetent one at that, in
order fully to appreciate the practical miracle (in Boltzmann's sense of
the word) which gives rise to a standard curve. A wealth of invisible
skills underpin material inscription. Every curve is surrounded by a
flow of disorder, and is only saved from dissolution because everything
is written or routinised in such a way that a point cannot as well be in
any place of the log paper. But the unhappy observer was not party to
these constraints! Instead of creating more order, he had only
succeeded in creating less; and, in the meantime, he had used up
animals, chemicals, time, and money.
   Even insecure bureaucrats and compulsive novelists are less
obsessed by inscriptions than scientists. Between scientists and chaos,
there is nothing but a wall of archives, labels, protocol books, figures,
and papers.19 But this mass of documents provides the only means of
creating more order and thus, like Maxwell's demon, of increasing the
246                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


amount of information in one place. So it is easy to appreciate their
obsession. Keeping track is the only way of seeing a pattern emerge out
of disorder (Watanaba, 1969). It might be impossible to differentiate
any of a thousand equally active peptides out of a soup of unpurified
brain extracts. If assays designed to separate out one of these peptides
were carefully carried out but not recorded, the technicians would
have to start all over again; there would be no way of discriminating
between statements because there would be no superimposition of
traces and consequently no construction of an object. When, by
contrast, a series of curves have been recorded, and it is possible to
spread them out on the large library table and ponder them, then an
object is in the process of construction. Objects appear because of the
constant process of sorting. Thin readable traces (produced by the
inscription devices) are recorded and this creates a pocket of order in
which not everything is equally probable. In view of eight years' worth
of documents and a million dollars' worth of equipment, the range of
possible statements which can be made about the structure of TRF is
restricted. The cost of selecting a statement from outside this range is
prohibitive.
  Maxwell's demon provides a useful metaphor for laboratory activity
because it shows both that order is created and that this order in no way
preexists the demon's manipulations. Scientific reality is a pocket of
order, created out of disorder by seizing on any signal which fits what
has already been enclosed and by enclosing it, albeit at a cost. In order
fully to explore the force of this model, however, it is necessary to
examine the relation between order and disorder in more detail.
Disorder is not only the noise in which statements made by inefficient
technicians are dissolved; paradoxically, the laboratory is also involved
in the production of disorder. By recording all events and keeping
traces from all the inscription devices, the laboratory overflows with
computer listings, data sheets, protocol books, diagrams, and so on.
Even if it successfully resists the outside disorder, the laboratory itself
generates disorder within its enclosure. The noise of thousands of
brain extracts, is replaced by the noise of accumulated data. Information again seems like the elusive needle in a haystack. No patterns
emerge. Participants' solution to this danger is selectively to eliminate
material from the mass of accumulated data. Here is the importance of
the statements, the genealogy of which we outlined in Chapter 2. The
problem is not now to discern a peak from the background noise (the
baseline), but to read a sentence out of the mass of gathered peaks and
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                 247


curves. One particular curve is selected, cleaned up, put on a slide and
shown around in conjunction with the statement: "Stress simultaneously releases ACTH and Beta Endorphine." This statement stands
out of and for the mass of figures. A paper begins to be drafted, which
constitutes a second-degree enclosure (an enclosure represented in
Fig. 2.1 by the laboratory partitions).
   Sorting, picking up and enclosing are costly operations, and they are
rarely successful; any slackening can once again drown a statement in
confusion. This is more so because a statement exists, not by itself, but
in the agonistic field (or market, Ch. 5) made up of the laboratories
striving to decrease their own noise. Is the statement going to stand out
in the field or will it merely once again be drowned in the mass of
literature on the subject? Perhaps it is already redundant, or simply
wrong. Perhaps it will never be picked out from the noise. The
laboratory's production process again seems chaotic: statements have
to be pushed, forced into the light, defended against attack, oblivion,
and neglect. Very few statements are seized upon by everyone in the
field because their use entails an enormous economy in the manipulation of data or statements (Brillouin, 1962: Ch. 4). These statements
are said to "make sense" or "to explain a lot of things" or to allow a
dramatic decrease in the noise of one inscription device: "now we can
obtain reliable data." Such very rare events, the sorting of facts from
the background noise, are often heralded by the Nobel Prizes and a
flourish of trumpets.
   Maxwell's demon creates order. This analogy not only provides a way
of summarising and relating the main concepts used in our earlier
description of laboratory activity; it also helps answer the objection
that we have not explained why a controversy becomes resolved, or
why a statement stabilises. But this objection only has meaning in so far
as it is assumed that order somehow preexists its "revelation" by
science, or in some way results from something other than disorder.
This basic philosophical assumption has recently been challenged,
and our intention in the next part of this chapter is to show what light is
shed on laboratory activity if such an assumption is modified. To do
this in full would entail going beyond the usual range of argument in
sociology of science, and certainly beyond the scope of this monograph. We therefore restrict our discussion to one further analogical
description of the laboratory.
   Figure 6.1 shows three stages of a game of "go" as related by
Kawabata (1972). The game of go starts from an empty board to which
248                                                   LABORATORY LIFE




Figure 6.1 a

stones are added in successive moves. The added stones do not move
around the board as, for example, in chess. Consequently, the first
moves are almost entirely contingent (Figure 6.la). As the game
progresses, however, it becomes less and less easy to play anywhere;
as in the agonistic field, the results of earlier play transforms the set of
future possible moves. Not all moves are equally possible (Figure
6. 1b). Indeed, some are totally impossible (for example, white cannot
play on the upper left hand corner), others are less likely, and some are
almost necessary (for example, play at 64 after 63 in Fig. 6.1 c). As in
the agonistic field, the changing pattern is not orderly: in the lower right
hand corner or in the middle of the board, it is possible to play almost
anywhere; but the situation in the left hand corner is definitively
settled. A territory may or may not be defended according to the
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                249




Figure 6.1 b
pressures exerted by the opponent. The game ends when all territory
has been appropriated (Figure 6.1c) and all disputed territories have
been settled (for example, the stones at the top). From an entirely
contingent beginning, the players arrive (without the use of external or
preexisting order) at a final point in the game where certain moves are
necessary. In principle, any individual move could be made anywhere;
in practice, the cost of spurning what appears the necessary move is
prohibitive. 20
   The relationship between order and disorder, which underpins our
account of the construction of facts, is very familiar to biologists
(Orgel, 1973;Monod, 1970; Jacob, 1977; Atlan, 1972). That life is an
orderly pattern emerging from disorder through the sorting of random
mutations, is the stock in trade of the biological representation of life.
250                                                  LABORATORY LIFE




For Monod, for example, chance (disorder) and necessity (a sorting
mechanism) are sufficient to account for the emergence of complex
organisation. Reality is constructed out of disorder, without the use of
any preexisting representation of life. Many of the laboratory members themselves used terms such as chance, mutation, niches, disorder,
and tinkering (Jacob, 1977) to account for life itself. But sociologists
of science seem extremely reluctant to introduce similar concepts to
account for the construction of reality. 21 After all, the construction of
reality might be no more complex than the generation of organisms.
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                251


The three brief analogies drawn above (Maxwell's devil, the game of
Go, and Monod's notion of chance and necessity) were intended
simply as a way of familiarising the reader with the slight modification
of background which is well known in many other disciplines, but
which seems to have escaped the attention of analysts of science.
    It is part of our world view that things are ordered, that order is the
rule, and that disorder should be eliminated wherever possible.
Disorder always has to be eliminated from politics and ethics as well as
from science. It is also part of our world view that only from disorder
can an orderly pattern emerge. These assumptions have recently been
challenged by several philosophers, especially Michel Serres, who, in
turn, have been greatly influenced by authors such as Brillouin and
Boltzmann and by new developments in biology. Their argument is
that these assumptions be inverted, that disorder be considered the rule
and order the exception. This argument has been familiar since life was
first considered to be a neguentropic event which fed off the much
 larger and opposite trend towards entropy. Recently, this picture has
been extended to include science itself as a marginal case of a certain
type of social organism, a particular but not a peculiar case of
neguentropy (Monod, 1970; Jacob, 1977; Serres, 1977a; 1977b). For
our purposes, the interesting part of this argument is the contention
that the construction of order relies upon the existence of disorder
(Atlan, 1972; Morin, 1977). If one accepts this suggested modification, it is possible to discern a marked convergence between our
approach and apparently disparate approaches to the social study of
science. 22 Let us consider four such approaches.
    Firstly, the history of science can be characterised as demonstrating
the chain of circumstances and unexpected events leading to this or
that discovery. However, this mass of events is not easily reconciled
with the solidity of the final achievements. This is one reason why the
context of justification is so frequently opposed to the context of
discovery. With the above modification of our background assumption, this opposition is no longer necessary (Feyerabend, 1975 ; Knorr,
 1978). To use Toulmin or Jacob's analogies, if life itself results from
tinkering and chance, it is surely not necessary to imagine that we need
more complex principles to account for science. The "événementialisation" (Foucault, 1978) of science made by historians penetrates
the core of fact construction. Secondly, sociologists have demonstrated the importance of informal communication in scientific activity.
This well-documented phenomenon takes on a new meaning against
the newly modified assumption: the production of new information is
252                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


necessarily obtained by way of unexpected meetings, through old boy
networks and by social proximity. The informal flow of information
does not contradict the orderly pattern of formal communication.
Instead, as we have suggested, much informal communication derives
its structure from its constant referral to the substance of formal
communication. Nonetheless, informal communication is the rule.
Formal communication is the exception, as an a posteriori rationalisation of the real process. Thirdly, citation analysts have demonstrated
the extensive waste of energy in scientific activity. Most published
papers are never read, the few that are read are worth little, and the
remaining 1 or 2 percent are transformed and misrepresented by those
who use them. But this waste no longer appears paradoxical if we
accept the hypothesis that order is an exception and disorder the rule.
Few facts emerge from the substantial background noise. The circumstances of discovery and the process of informal exchange are both
crucial to the productive process: they are what allows science to exist
at all. Finally, growing sociological interest in the details of negotiation between scientists has revealed the unreliability of scientists'
memories and the inconsistency of their accounts. Each scientist
strives to get by amid a wealth of chaotic events. Every time he sets up
an inscription device, he is aware of a massive background of noise and
a multitude of parameters beyond his control; every time he reads
Science or Nature, he is confronted by a volume of contradictory
concepts, trivia, and errors; every time he participates in some
controversy, he finds himself immersed in a storm of political passions.
This background is everpresent, and it is only rarely that a pocket of
stability emerges from it. The revelation of the diversity of accounts
and inconsistency of scientific arguments should therefore come as no
surprise: on the contrary, the emergency of an accepted fact is the rare
event which should surprise us.

A New Fiction For Old?
  We have so far in this chapter summarised the arguments of the
former chapters, showed how they are related through the notion of the
construction of order out of disorder and linked them to what has been
done in sociology of science. We shall now summarise the methodological problems encountered in the course of our argument,
looking in particular at the thorny issue of the status of our own
account. What is the basis for our claim that scientists produce order
from disorder? Obviously, our own account cannot escape the
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                               253


conditions of its own construction. From what kind of disorder does
our account emerge? In which agonistic field are we to put together
differences between fiction and fact?
   Throughout the argument, we have stressed the importance of
avoiding certain distinctions commonly adopted by analysts of scientific activity. In Chapter 1, we refused to accept the distinction
between social and technical issues; in Chapter 2, we had to suspend
any given distinction of nature between facts and artefacts; in Chapter
3, we demonstrated that the difference between internal and external
factors was a consequence of the elaboration of facts rather than a
given starting point for understanding their genesis; in Chapter 4, we
argued for the suspension of a priori distinctions between common
sense and scientific reasoning; even the distinction between "thought"
and craftwork needed to be avoided as an explanatory resource
because it appeared to be the consequence of scientific work in the
laboratory; similarly, in Chapter 5, we argued that the notion of
scientists as individuals was the consequence of the appropriation
conflicts within the laboratory.
   Stylistically, the replacement and avoidance of these obsolete
distinctions presented severe difficulties. In allying our discussion to
each of certain literary genres (for example, the "historical" discussion of Ch. 3), we found ourselves constrained by using terminology
which tended to reintroduce these distinctions. For this reason, it was
necessary to look carefully at our own usage of words. For example,
the term social has connotations which make it difficult to avoid
importing distinctions, such as that between social and technical.
Similarly, the term familiar obscures the particular sense with which
we wanted to apply the notion of an anthropology of science. In
Chapter 3, in particular, we had to resist terminology commonly
employed in historical accounts because it had the tendency of
transforming constructed facts into "discovered" facts. In Chapter 4,
the use of the expression "I had an idea" or the tautological use of
"scientific" was sufficient to destroy the tenor of our argument.
Consequently, it was necessary to dispute some of the terms used by
epistemologists. By employing the word credit and by exploring its
various different meanings, we circumvented some of the distinctions
which usually come to mind when one uses terms such as strategy,
motivations, and careers.
   We have thus tried to exercise some care in discriminating between
the kinds of terms and distinctions which might jeopardise our account
254                                                 LABORATORY LIFE


of laboratory life. However, we have as yet to clarify what differentiates our account of laboratory life from those routinely produced by
scientists. Is there any essential distinction between the nature of our
own construction and that used by our subjects? Emphatically, the
answer must be no. Only by rejecting the possibility of this last
distinction can the arguments of this chapter cohere. The notion of
creating order from disorder applies as much to the construction of our
own account as to that of the laboratory scientists. How then do we
know how they know?
   How have we built up our account of fact production whereby
laboratory scientists get by with fictions which they push as hard as
they can in the agonistic field?
  If we return to the situation (described in Ch. 2) where the naive
observer visited the "strange" laboratory, it is clear that he constructed
his preliminary accounts out of disorder. He neither knew what to
observe, nor the names of the objects in front of him. In contrast to his
informants, who exhibited confidence in all their actions, our observer
felt distinctly uneasy. He found himself wondering where to sit, when
to stand, how to present himself, and what questions to ask. A flood of
gossip, anecdotes, lectures, explanations, impressions, and feelings
emerged from his initial daily contact with the laboratory. Subsequently,
however, he began to set up a crude inscription device to monitor these
data. He found himself as observer connected up to a screen (his
notebooks), the effects being recorded by means of amplification (such
as his definition of assays). But these first "socioassays" were extremely
noisy and chaotic. The early notebooks reveal the confusion of the first
recordings: trivia, generalities, noise, and more noise.
  The observer was obliged to create some stable pockets of order out
of this flood of impressions. He attempted this, first by a crude
imitation of the method of his informants: he plotted time on one axis of
a piece of graph paper and wrote the names of the scientists on the
other. Armed with a watch, he inscribed who did what and when. In
this way he began to produce ordered information. In another instance,
he distilled the pattern of citations received by group members from the
mass of citation data in the SCI. Like any conscientious Maxwell's
devil, he filtered the names he required, counted the citations and
 inscribed them in columns. One result was Figure 5.3: a relatively
modest achievement, admittedly, but one which granted him a brief
moment of contentment. On the basis of this result, he could make a
statement: when his informants objected that the claim was nonsen-
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                 255


sical, he was then able to produce the figure and this had the effect of
quietening his audience, at least temporarily.
   In the course of a few months, our observer accumulated a sizeable
body of similar figures, documents, and other notes. In terms of the
analogy with "go" he began to fill his board with random moves.
Consequently, as he progressed further, he realised that it was no
longer possible to make just any statement on the basis of this
accumulated material. In addition, our observer found himself able
either to counter or support some of the arguments in the science
studies literature. He could also transform them into artefacts or facts
with the use of the objects he had begun to amass. He began to write
articles and to operate in his own agonistic field. At this stage,
however, his accounts were so weak that any other account seemed
equally plausible. Moreover, his informants flooded him with contradictory examples and argued for alternative interpretations.
   By returning to the initial stages of the study, then, we can discern an
essential similarity between the methods of the observer and his
informants. Even so, it is not clear who was imitating whom. Were the
scientists imitating the observer, or vice versa?
   As mentioned earlier, part of the observer's experience involved his
participation as laboratory technician. From time to time he could don
a white coat, go into the biassay room, and set up an assay for the
melanotropin stimulating hormone (MSH) instead of drawing citation
curves and transcribing interviews. (MSH darkens frog skin, as
measured by variations of light in a reflectometer.)
   The observer had his protocol book and an empty data sheet in front
of him. He seized the jumping frogs, beheaded, and flayed them, and
finally immersed thin sections of skin in the beakers. He placed each of
the beakers over a source of light and took readings from the
reflectometer, which he then wrote down. By the end of the day, he had
accumulated a small stack of figures which could be fed into the
computer (Photograph 11). After this he was left only with standard
deviations, levels of significance, and means in the computer listing.
On the basis of these he drew a curve and, taking it into his boss's
office, argued about the slight differences or similarities in the curve in
order to make a point.
   Some similarities between the construction of the citation curve and
that of the standard curve for MSH are obvious. Thus, the following
features are common to both activities. Inscription devices were set
up; five or ten names were singled out of the millions in the SCI (only a
256                                                   LABORATORY LIFE


few pieces of skin were taken from the complexity of the frog
organism); the investigator placed a premium on those effects which
were recordable; the data were cleaned up so as to produce peaks
which were clearly discernible from the background; and, finally, the
resulting figures were used as sources of persuasion in an argument.
These similarities make it difficult to maintain that there is any
fundamental difference between the methods of "hard" and "soft"
science.
   The similarity of his two roles began to prove unnerving. Our
observer sometimes felt himself completely assimilated into "his"
laboratory: he was addressed as "doctor," possessed protocol books
and slides, submitted papers, met colleagues at congresses and busied
himself setting up new inscription devices and filling in questionnaires.
On the other hand, he was painfully aware of the enormous distance
between the apparent solidity of his informants' constructions and his
own. In order to study half a gram of brain extract, they had at their
disposal tons of material, millions of dollars, and a large group of some
forty people; in order to study the laboratory, our observer was alone.
At the bench, working on the MSH assay, people would constantly
peer over his shoulder and criticise him ("don't hold your pipette like
that"; "let me redo your dilution"; "check this reading again") or
direct his attention to one of the sixty articles written about the assay. 23
While tinkering a few makeshift methods for analysing the work of the
laboratory, he had few general contacts and no precedent upon which
he felt he could build. The scientists had a laboratory, in which were
gathered all the stable objects of their field, and free access to the
object under construction; the observer had no such resources.
Moreover, he had to settle in the laboratory used as a resource by the
scientists and to beg information as a stranger, a foreigner, and a
layman.
   The difference in credibility accorded the observer's and the
informants' constructions corresponds directly to the extent of prior
investments. Occasionally, when members of the laboratory derided
the relative weakness and fragility of the observer's data, the observer
pointed out the extent of the imbalance between the resources which
the two parties enjoyed. "In order to redress this imbalance, we would
require about a hundred observers of this one setting, each with the
same power over their subjects as you have over your animals. In other
words, we should have TV monitoring in each office; we should be able
to bug the phones and the desks; we should have complete freedom to
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                               257


take EEGs; and we would reserve the right to chop off participants'
heads when internal examination was necessary. With this kind of
freedom, we could produce hard data." Inevitably, these kinds of
remarks sent participants scurrying off to their assay rooms, muttering
darkly about the "Big Brother" in their midst.
   Gradually, the observer gained confidence in his work: he was both
adding to the stockpile of inscriptions in his office and beginning to
realise that there was nothing special or mysterious about the
difference between his activity and that of his informants. The
essential similarity was that both were engaged in craftwork; differences could be explained in terms of resources and investments, and
without recourse to exotic qualities of the nature of the activity.
Consequently, the observer began to feel less intimidated. When his
informants were interpreting traces on the library table, for example,
they really seemed little different to him; they pondered diagrams,
putting some aside, evaluating the strength of others, seizing on weak
analogical links, and so slowly constructed an account. At the same
time, the observer was writing a fictional account on the basis of
makeshift curves and documents. Informants and observer shared
participation in the art of interpreting confused texts (texts comprising
slides, diagrams, other paper, and curves) and of writing persuasive
accounts.4
   Our account of fact construction in a biology laboratory is neither
superior nor inferior to those produced by scientists themselves. It is
not superior because we do not claim to have any better access to
"reality," and we do not claim to be able to escape from our
description of scientific activity: the construction of order out of
disorder at a cost, and without recourse to any preexisting order. In a
fundamental sense, our own account is no more than fiction.25 But this
does not make it inferior to the activity of laboratory members: they
too were busy constructing accounts to be launched in the agonistic
field, and loaded with various sources of credibility in such a way that
once convinced, others would incorporate them as givens, or as
matters of fact, in their own construction of reality. Nor is there any
difference in the sources of credibility upon which they and we can
draw so as to force people to drop modalities from proposed statements.
The only difference is that they have a laboratory. We, on the other
hand, have a text, this present text. By building up an account,
inventing characters (for example, the observer of Ch. 2), staging
concepts, invoking sources, linking to arguments in the field of
258                                                            LABORATORY LIFE


sociology, and footnoting, we have attempted to decrease sources of
disorder and to make some statements more likely than others, thereby
creating a pocket of order. Yet this account itself will now become part
of a field of contention. How much further research, investment,
redefinition of the field, and transformation of what counts as an
acceptable argument are necessary to make this account more
plausible than its alternatives?



                                    NOTES
      1. This point has been made frequently by Bachelard (for example, 1934; 1953).
However, his interest in demonstrating the "mediations" in scientific work was never
extended. His "rational materialism," as he put it, was more often than not the basis for
distinguishing between science and "prescientific" ideas. His exclusive interest in "la
coupure épistémologique" prevented him from undertaking sociological investigations
of science, even though many of his remarks about science make better sense when set
within a sociological framework.
      2. From the outset, the observer was struck by the almost absurd contrast between
the mass of the apparatus and the minute quantities of processed brain extract. The
interaction between scientific "minds" and "nature" could not adequately account for
this contrast.
      3. In a different context, the importance of the stakes may vary. For example, the
importance of somatostatin for the treatment of diabetes ensures that each of the group's
articles is carefully checked. In the case of endorphine, by contrast, any article (no
matter what the wildness of its conjectures) will initially be accepted as fact.
      4. On his first day in the laboratory, the observer was greeted with a maxim which
was constantly repeated to him in one or another modified form throughout his time in
the field: "The truth of the matter is that 99.9% (90%) of the literature is meaningless
(crap)."
      5. We base this argument on several conversational exchanges which took place
between lawyers and scientists. Unfortunately, we are not able to make explicit use of
this material here.
      6. It is crucial to our argument that anything can be reified, no matter how
mythical, absurd, whimsical, or logical it might seem either before or after the event.
Callón (1978), for example, has shown how technical apparatus can incorporate the
outcome of totally absurd decisions. Once reified, however, these decisions take the
role of premise in subsequent logical arguments. In more philosophical terms, one
cannot understand science by accepting the Hegelian argument that "real is rational."
     7. But for a few pages in Lacan (1966) and some indirect hints by Young (n.d), a
psychoanalytic understanding of these kinds of energy investments is as yet undeveloped.
     8. For example, Machlup (1962) and Rescher (1978) have attempted to understand the information market in economic terms. However, their approach extends
rather than transforms the central notion of economic investment. By contrast,
Bourdieu ( 1976) and Foucault (1978) have outlined a general framework for a political
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                                  259

economy of truth (or of credit) which subsumes monetary economics as one particular
form of investment.
       9. The philosophical enterprise can be characterised as an attempt to eliminate
any trace of circumstances. Thus, the task of Socrates in Plato's Apology of Socrates is
to eliminate circumstances included in the definition of activity provided by the artist,
the lawyer, and so on. Such elimination is the price which has to be paid in order to
establish the existence of an "idea." Sohn Rethel (1975) has argued that such
philosophical operations were essential for the development of science and economics.
It could be argued, therefore, that the task of reconstructing circumstances is
fundamentally hampered by the legacies of a philosophical tradition.
     10. Barthes argues that this kind of transformation is typical of modern economics.
It is thus possible that there is some useful similarity between Marx's ( 1867) notion of
fetishism and the notion of scientific facts. (Both fact and fetish share a common
etymological origin.) In both cases, a complex variety of processes come into play
whereby participants forget that what is "out there" is the product of their own
"alienated" work.
     11. Brillouin uses the word likely in a counterintuitive way. It is only if a statement
is unlikely that it contains information since its distance from the background of equally
probable statements is very great. In ordinary language, however, we might say that
people believe a statement when it is more likely than the others. The reason for this
apparent contradiction is that information is nothing but a ratio of signal to noise.
     12. In the course of our discussion, we have tried to minimise distinctions between
convincing ourselves and convincing others. In interviews the continuous shortcuts
between the two were so common ("I wanted to be sure, and I did not want W to stand up
and contradict me"), that we gave up making this artificial distinction. Our experience
suggests that, perhaps in the most secret part of his consciousness, a scientist argues
with the whole agonistic field and anticipates every single one of his colleagues' potential
objections.
     13. This formulation closely matches scientists' own impression of a messy field: it
is a field in which you can say anything or, more precisely, in which anyone can equally
well say anything.
     14. This is not to say that it is impossible in principle to contest the argument based
on the use of a mass spectrometer. But the cost of modifying the basis of the theory is so
high that, in practice, no one will challenge it. (The exception, perhaps is in the case of a
scientific revolution. ) The difference between what is possible in principle and what can
be done in practice is the lynchpin of our argument. As Leibnitz put it: "Everything is
possible, but not everything is compossible." The process by which the realm of
compossibility is extended was explored in Chapter 3. The mass spectrometer is no
more truthful than thin-layer chromotography; it is simply more powerful.
    15. The term "black box" also brings to mind Whitley's (1972) argument that
sociologists of science should not treat the cognitive culture of scientists as a selfcontained entity immune from sociological investigation. Although we sympathise with
this view, Whitley misses a crucial point. The activity of creating black boxes, of
rendering items of knowledge distinct from the circumstances of their creation, is
precisely what occupies scientists the majority of the time. The way in which black
boxing is done in science is thus an important focus for sociological investigation. Once
an item of apparatus or a set of gestures is established in the laboratory, it becomes very
difficult to effect the retransformation into a sociological object. The cost of revealing
260                                                               LABORATORY LIFE


sociological factors (the cost, for example, of portraying the genesis of TRF) is a
reflection of the importance of the black boxing activities of the past.
     16. This is why we do not need different sets of rules by which to account for the
political world and the scientific world. Similarly, we consider scientists' honesty and
dishonesty from a single analytical perspective. Fraud and honesty are not fundamentally different kinds of behaviour; they are strategies whose relative value depends
on the circumstances and the state of the agonistic field.
     17. If reality means anything, it is that which "resists" (from the Latin "res"-
thing) the pressure of a force. The argument between realists and relativists is
exacerbated by the absence of an adequate definition of reality. It is possible that the
following is sufficient: that which cannot be changed at will is what counts as real.
     18. Although Brillouin is largely unknown among sociologists of science, he has
made important contributions to a materialist analysis of science production. He
regards all scientific activity (including the so-called "intellectual" or "cognitive"
ones) as material operations which are in any way homologous to the usual object of
physics. Since he provides a bridge between matter and information, he also bridges the
gap-so dramatic for the study of science-between intellectual and material factors.
     19. Even bench work can best be analyzed in terms of staging and writing. The
samples are put into coloured racks on one side of the surgical table, and are moved
slowly. The movement is monitored by a stop watch and recorded on a sheet of paper.
Even at this level, possible objections are being countered by the set of precautions
exercised in conducting this work (see Photograph File).
     20. Many other aspects of the Go game analogy could be applied to the work of
science. The main advantage of the analogy is that it provides an approximate
illustration of the contingency/necessity dialectic. A further advantage is its illustration
of the reification process in science. In Figure 6. 1c, for example, the stone played at the
fourth move lies next to another played at the 148th move. A group of white stones have
been surrounded and are removed from the board.This approximates the movement of
contradiction as shown in Chapter 3; whether or not a given formation is seen as
contradictory (and requires elimination) will depend on the local context and on the
pressures of the agonistic field. In this case, elimination will result from black's decision
to play at a certain position.
     21. One of the main interests of the field study is that the sociological work could be
pursued hand-in-hand with the biological research of the institute. But it was clear to the
observer that both his informants and his sociological colleagues were claiming to be
doing science. The problems raised by this complicated relationship will be examined in
detail elsewhere.
     22. Our claim is not that we are advancing an original "paradigm" for the analysis
of science. We simply aim to show how close our anthropological position is to other
 studies broadly named "sociology of science." Our impression is that the main
 approaches followed so far are (a) not connected to one another; (b) somewhat
 undecided on what is the final status of their findings. The slight, but radical,
 modification of background that we entertain here might provide a vantage point from
 which the importance of these findings can be fully appreciated.
     23. This was due, in part, to the observer's isolation and lack of training and, in part,
 to the lack of any former anthropological studies of modern science. One particularly
 useful source was Auge's (1975) analysis of witchcraft in the Ivory Coast, which
 provides an intellectual framework for resistance to being impressed by scientific
 endeavour.
The Creation of Order Out of Disorder                                               261

    24. It seems that the basic prototype of scientific activity is not to be found in the
realm of mathematics or logic but, as Nietzsche ( 1974) and Spinoza ( 1667) frequently
pointed out, in the work of exegesis. Exegesis and hermeneutics are the tools around
which the idea of scientific production has historically been forged. We claim that our
empirical observations of laboratory activity fully support that audacious point of view;
the notion of inscription, for example, is not to be taken lightly (Derrida, 1977).
    25. ''Fiction" is to be taken as having a noncommitted or "agnostic" meaning that
can be applied to the whole process of fact production but to none of its stages in
particular. The production of reality is what concerns us here, rather than any one
produced final stage (stage 5 in the terminology of Ch. 2). Our main interest in using the
word "fiction" is the connotation of literature and writing accounts. De Certeau once
said (pers. com.), "There can only be a science of science-fiction." Our discussion is a
first tentative step towards making clear the link between science and literature (Serres,
1977).
This page intentionally left blank
                            REFERENCES
Anonymous (1974) Sephadex: Gel Filtration in Theory and Practice. Uppsala:
   Pharmacia.
___(1976a) B.L.'s interview. Oct. 19. Dallas.
___(1976b) B.L.'s interview. Oct. 19. Dallas
ALTHUSSER, L. (1974) La philosophie spontanée des savants. Paris: Maspéro.
ARISTOTLE (1897) The Rhetorics of Aristotle. Trans, by E. M. Cope and J. E.
   Sandys. Cambridge.
ATLAN, H. (1972) L'organisation biologique et la théorie de l'information. Paris:
   Hermann.
AUGE, M. (1975) Théories des pouvoirs et idéologies. Paris: Hermann.
BACHELARD, G. (1934) Le nouvel esprit scientifique. Paris: P.U.F.
___ (1953) Le matérialisme rationnel. Paris: P.U.F.
___ (1967) La formation de l'esprit scientifique: contribution à une psychoanalyse
   de la connaissance approchée. Paris: Vrin.
BARNES, B. (1974) Scientific Knowledge and Sociological Theory. London: Routledge
   and Kegan Paul.
___ and LAW, J. (1976) "Whatever should be done with indexical expressions?"
   Theory and Society 3 (2): 223-237.
BARNES, B. and SHAPIN, S. [eds.] (forthcoming) Natural Order: Historical Studies
   of Scientific Culture. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.
BARTHES, R. (1957) Mythologies. Paris: Le Seuil.
___ (1966) Critique et vérité. Paris: Le Seuil.
___ (1973) Le plaisir du texte. Paris: Le Seuil.
BASTIDE, F. (forthcoming) Analyse sémiotique d'un article de science expérimentale.
   Urbino: Centre International de Sémiotique.
Beckman Instruments (1976) B.L.'s interview. Aug. 24. Palo Alto.
BEYNON, J. H. (1960) Mass Spectometry. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
BERNAL, J. D. (1939) The Social Function of Science. London: Routledge and
   Kegan Paul
BERNARD, C. (1865) Introduction à l'étude de la Medicina Experimentale. Paris.
BHASKAR, R. (1975) A Realist Theory of Science. Atlantic Highlands, N. J.:
   Humanities Press.
BITZ, A., McALPINE, A., and WHITLEY, R. D. (1975) The Production, Flow and
   Use of Information in Research Laboratories in Different Sciences. Manchester
   Business School and Centre for Business Research.
BLACK, M. (1961) Models and Metaphors. Ithaca, N. Y.: Cornell University Presa.
BLISSETT, M. (1972) Politics in Science. Boston: Little, Brown.
BLOOR, D. (1974) "Popper's mystification of objective knowledge. "Science Studies
   4: 65-76.
___ (1976) Knowledge and Social Imagery. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
___ (1978) "Polyhedra and the abominations of Leviticus." British Journal for
   the History of Science 11: 245-272.

                                                                             263
264                                                          LABORATORY LIFE

BOGDANOVE, E. M. (1962) "Regulations of TSH secretion."Federations Pro-
   ceeding 21: 623.
BOLER, J., ENZMANN, F., FOLKERS, K., BOWERS, C. Y., and SCHALLY, A.
   V. (1969) "The identity of clinical and hormonal properties of the thyrotropin
   releasing hormones and pyroglutamyl-histidine-proline amide." B. B. R. C. 37:705.
BOURDIEU, P. (1972) Esquisse d'une théorie de la practique. Genève: Droz.
_____ ((1975a) "Le couturier et sa griffe." Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales
   1(1).
___(1975b) "The spefîcity of the scientific field and the social conditions of the
   progress of reason." Social Science Information 14 (6): 19-47.
___ (1977) "La production de la croyance: contribution a une economie des biens
   symbolique." Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales 13: 3-43.
BRAZEAU, P. and GUILLEMIN, R. (1974) "Somatostatin: newcomer from the
   hypothalamus." New England Journal of Medicine 290: 963-964.
BRILLOUIN, L. (1962) Science and Information Theory. New York: Academic
   Press.
___ (1964) Scientific Uncertainty and Information. New York: Academic Press.
BROWN, P. M. (1973) High Pressure Liquid Chromatography. New York: Academic
   Press.
BULTMANN, R. (1921) Die Geschichte der synoptischen Tradition. Göttingen:
   Vandenhoek und Ruprecht. (Histoire de la tradition synoptique. Paris: Le Seuil
   (1973).)
BURGUS, R. (1976) B.L.'s interview. April 6. San Diego.
___ and GUILLEMIN, R. (1970a) "Chemistry of thyrotropin releasing factor in
   hypophysiotropic hormones of the hypothalamus." Pp. 227-241 in J. Meites (eds.)
   Hypophysiotropic Hormones of the Hypothalamus. Baltimore: Williams and
   Wilkins.
_____ (1970b) "Hypothalamic releasing factors." Annual Review of Biochemistry
   39: 499-526.
BURGUS, R , WARD, D. N. SAKIZ, E., and GUILLEMIN, R. (1966) "Actions des
   enzymes protéolytiques sur des préparations purifiées de l'hormone hypothalamique
   TSH (TRF)." C. R. de l'Ac. des sciences 262: 2643-2645.
BURGUS, R., DUNN, T. F., WARD, D. N., VALE, W., AMOSS, M., and
   GUILLEMIN, R. (1969a) "Dérivés polypeptidiques de synthèse doues d' activité
   hypophysiotrope TRF." C.R. de l'Ac. des Sciences 268: 2116-2118.
BURGUS, R., DUNN, T. F., DESIDERO, D., VALE, W., and GUILLEMIN, R.
   (1969b) "Dérivés polypeptidiques de synthèse doués d'activité hypophysiotrope
   TRF: nouvelles observations." C.R. de l'Ac. des Sciences 269: 226-228.
BURGUS, R., DUNN, T. F., DESIDERO, D., and GUILLEMIN, R. (1969c)
   "Structure moléculaire du facteur hypothalamique hypophysiotrope TRF d'origine
   ovine." C.R. de l'Ac. des Sciences 269: 1870-1873.
BURGUS, R., DUNN, T. F., DESIDERO, D., WARD, D. N., VALE, W., and
   GUILLEMIN, R. ( 1970) "Characterization of ovine hypothalamic TSH-releasing
   factor (TRF)." Nature 226 (5243): 321-325.
CALLON, M. (1975) "L'opération de traduction comme relation symbolique." In P.
   Roqueplo (ed.) Incidence des rapports sociaux sur le développement scientifique et
   technique. Paris: C.N.R.S.
___ (1978) De problèmes en problèmes: itinéraires d'un laboratoire universitaire
   saisi par l'aventure technologique. Paris: Cordes.
References                                                                       265

COLE, J. R. and COLE, S. (1973) Social Stratification in Science. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press.
COLLINS, H. M. (1974) "The T.E.A. set: tacit knowledge and scientific networks."
   Science Studies 4: 165-186.
___ (1975) "The seven sexes: a study in the sociology of a phenomenon or the
   replication of experiments in physics.'' Sociology 9 (2): 205-224.
___ and COX, G. (1977) "Relativity revisited: Mrs. Keech-a suitable case for
   special treatment?'' Social Studies of Science 7 (3) 372-381.
COSER, L. A. and ROSENBURG, B. [eds.] (1964) Sociological Theory. London:
   Macmillan.
COSTA de BEAUREGARD, O. (1963) Le second principe de la science du temps:
   entropie, information, irréversibilité. Paris: Le Seuil.
CRANE, D. (1969) "Social structure in a group of scientists: a test of the 'invisible
   college' hypothesis." American Sociological Review 34: 335-352.
___(1972) Invisible Colleges. London: University of Chicago Press.
___ (1977) "Review symposium." Society for Social Studies of Science Newsletter
   2 (4): 27-29.
CRICK, F. and WATSON, J. (1977) B.L.'s interview. Feb. 18. San Diego.
DAGOGNET, F. (1973) Ecriture et iconographie. Paris: Vrin.
DAVIS, M. S. (1971) "That's interesting." Philosophy of the Social Sciences 1: 309-
   344
DE CERTEAU (1973) L'écriture de l'histoire. Paris: Le Seuil.
DERRIDA, J. ( 1977) Of Grammatology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
DONOVAN, B. T., McCANN, S. M, and MEITES, J. [eds.] (forthcoming) Pioneers
   in Neuroendocrinology, Vol. 2. New York: Plenum Press.
DUCROT, V. and TODOROV, T. (1972) Dictionaire encyclopédique des sciences du
   language. Paris: Le Seuil.
EDGE, D. O. [ed.] (1964) Experiment: A Series of Scientific Case Histories. London:
   BBC
___ (1976) "Quantitative measures of communication in science." Paper presented
   at the International Symposium on Quantitative Measures in the History of Science.
   Berkeley, California, Aug. 25-27.
___ and MULKAY, M. J. (1976) Astronomy Transformed. London: Wiley-
   Interscience.
EGGERTON, F. N. [ed.] (1977) The History of American Ecology. New York: Arno
   Press.
FEYERABEND, P. (1975) Against Method. London: NLB.
FOLKERS, K., ENZMANN, F., BOLER, J. G., BOWERS, C. Y., and SCHALLY,
   A. V. ( 1969) "Discovery of modification of the synthetic tripeptide-sequence of the
   thyrotropin releasing hormone having activity." B.B.R.C. 37: 123.
FORMAN, P. (1971) "Weimar culture, causality and quantum theory 1918-1927." In
   Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences. Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl-
   vania Press.
FOUCAULT, M. (1966) Les mots et les choses. Paris: Gallimard.
___ (1972) Histoire de la folie a l'âge classique. Paris: Gallimard.
___ (1975) Surveiller et punir. Paris: Gallimard.
___ (1978) "Vérité et pouvoir." L'arc 70.
FRAME, J. D., NARIN, F., and CARPENTER, M. P. (1977) "The distribution of
   world science." Social Studies of Science 7: 501-516.
266                                                          LABORATORY LIFE


GARFINKEL, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
  Prentice-Hall.
GARVEY, W. D. and GRIFFITH, B. C. (1967) "Scientific communication as a social
   system." Science 157: 1011-1016.
___ (1971) "Scientific communication: its role in the conduct of research and
   creation of knowledge." American Psychologist 26: 349-362.
GELOTTE, B. and PORATH, J. (1967) "Gel filtration in chromotography." In E.
   Heftmann (ed.) Chromatography. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
GILBERT, G. N. (1976) "The development of science and scientific knowledge: the
   case of radar meteor research." Pp. 187-204 in Lemaine et al. (eds.) Perspectives on
   the Emergence of Scientific Disciplines. The Hague: Mouton/Aldine.
GILPIN, R. and WRIGHT, C. [eds.] (1964) Scientists and National Policy Making.
   New York: Columbia University Press.
GLASER, B. and STRAUSS, A. ( 1968) The Discovery of Grounded Theory. London:
   Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
GOLDSMITH, M. and MACKAY, A. [eds.] (1964) The Science of Science. London:
   Souvenir.
GOPNIK, M. (1972) Linguistic Structure in Scientific Texts. Amsterdam: Mouton.
GREEP, R. O. (1963) "Synthesis and summary." Pp. 511-517 in Advances in
   Neuroendocrinology. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
GREIMAS, A. J. (1976) Sémiotique et sciences sociales. Paris: Le Seuil.
GUILLEMIN, R. (1963) "Sur la nature des substances hypothalamiques qui
   contrôlent la sécrétion des hormones antéhypophysaires." Journal de Psysiologie
   55: 7-44.
___ (1975) B.L.'s interview. Nov. 28. San Diego.
__ ___ (1976) "The endocrinology of the neuron and the neural origin of endocrine
   cells." In J. C. Porter (ed.) Workshop on Peptide Releasing Hormones. New York:
   Plenum Press.
___ and BURGUS, R. (1972) "The hormones of the hypothalamus." Scientific
   American 227(5): 24-33.
___SAKIZ, E., and WARD, D. N. (1966) "Nouvelles données sur la purification
   de l'hormone hypothalamique TSH hypophysiotrope, TRF." C. R. de FAc. des
   Sciences 262: 2278-2280.
GUILLEMIN, R., BURGUS, R., and VALE, W. (1968) "TSH releasing factor: an
   RF model study." Exerpta Medica Inter. Congress Series 184: 577-583.
GUILLEMIN, R., SAKIZ, E., and WARD, D. N. (1965) "Further purification of
   TSH releasing factor (TRF)." P.S.E.B.M. 118: 1132-1137.
GUILLEMIN, R., YAMAZAKI, E., JUTISZ, M., and SAKIZ, E. ( 1962) "Présence
   dans un extrait de tissus hypothalamiques d'une substance stimulant la sécrétion de
   l'hormone hypophysaire thyréotrope (TSH)." C. R. de l'Ac. des Sciences 255:
    1018-1020.
GUSFIELD, J. (1976) "The literary rhetoric of science." American Sociological
   Review 41 (1): 16-34.
___ (forthcoming) "Illusion of authority: rhetoric, ritual and metaphor in public
   actions-the case of alcohol and traffic safety."
HABERMAS, J. (1971) Knowledge and Human Interests. Boston: Beacon Press.
HAGSTROM, W. O. (1965) The Scientific Community. New York: Basic Books.
References                                                                      267

HARRIS, G. W. (1955) Neural Control of the Pituitary Gland. Baltimore: Williams
   and Wilkins.
___ (1972) "Humours and hormones." Journal of Endocrinology 53: i-xxiii.
HARRIS, M. (1968) The Rise of Anthropological Theory. London: Routledge and
   Kegan Paul.
HEFTMANN, E. [ed.] (1967) Chromatography. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
HESSE, M. (1966) Models and Analogies in Science. Notre Dame, IN: Notre Dame
   University Press.
HORTON, R. (1967) "African traditional thought and Western science.'' Africa 37:
   50-71, 155-187.
HOYLE, F. (1975) Letter to the Times. April 8.
HUME, D. (1738) A Treatise of Human Nature. London.
JACOB, F. (1970) La logique du vivant. Paris: Gallimard.
___ (1977) "Evolution and tinkering." Science 196(4295): 1161-1166.
JUTISZ, P., SAKIZ, E., YAMAZAKI, E., and GUILLEMIN, R. (1963) "Action
   des enzymes protéolytiques sur les facteurs hypothalamiques LRF et TRF." C.R.
   de la société de Biologie 157 (2): 235.
KANT, E. (1950) [l787] Critique of Pure Reason. London: Macmillan.
KAWABATA, Y. (1972) The Master of Go. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
KORACH, M. (1964) "The science of industry." Pp. 179-194 in Goldsmith and
   Mackay (eds.) The Science of Science. London: Souvenir.
KNORR, K. (1978) "Producing and reproducing knowledge: descriptive or construc-
   tive." Social Science Information 16(6): 669-696.
___(forthcoming) "From scenes to scripts: on the relationships between research
   and publication in science."
___ (forthcoming) "The research process: tinkering towards success or approxi-
   mation of truth." Theory and Society.
KUHN, T. (1970) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press.
LACAN, J. (1966) Les écrits. Chapter: "La science et la vérité,"Pp. 865-879. Paris:
   Le Seuil.
LAKATOS, I. and MUSGRAVE, A. (1970) Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge.
   Cambridge: Cambridge Universtiy Press.
LATOUR, B. (1976) "Including citations counting in the systems of actions of
   scientific papers." Society for Social Studies of Science, 1st meeting, Ithaca,
   Cornell University.
___ (1976b) "A simple model for a comprehensive sociology of science."
   (mimeographed).
___ (1978, forthcoming) "The three little dinosaurs."
___ and FABBRI, P. (1977) "Pouvoir et devoir dans un article de science
   exacte." Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales 13: 81-95.
LATOUR, B. and RIVIER, J. (1977, forthcoming) "Sociology of a molecule."
LAW, J. (1973) "The development of specialities in science: the case of X-ray protein
   crystallography." Science Studies 3: 275-303.
LEATHERDALE (1974) The Role of Analogy, Model and Metaphor in Science.
   New York: Else vier.
LECOURT, D. (1976) Lyssenko. Paris: Maspéro.
LEHNINGER, (1975) Biochemistry. New York: Worth.
268                                                       LABORATORY LIFE


LEMAINE, G., CLEMENÇON, M., GOMIS, A., POLLIN, B., and SALVO, B.
   (1977) Stratégies et choix dans la recherche apropos des travaux sur le sommeil.
   The Hague: Mouton.
LEMÀINE, G., LÉCUYER, B. P., GOMIS, A., and BARTHÉLÉMY, G. (1972) Les
   voies du succès. Paris: G.E.R.S.
LEMAINE, G., MACLEOD, R., MULKAY, M., and WEINGART, P. [eds.] (1976)
   Perspectives on the Emergence of Scientific Disciplines. The Hague: Mouton/
   Aldine.
LEMAINE, G. and MATALÓN, B. (1969) "La lutte pour la vie dans la cité
   scientifique." Revue Française de Sociologie 10: 139-165.
LEVI-STRAUSS, C. (1962) La pensée sauvage. Paris: Pion.
LOVELL, B. (1973) Out of the Zenith. London: Oxford University Press.
LYOTARD, J. F. (1975, 1976) Lessons on Sophists. San Diego: University of
   California.
McCANN, S. M. (1976) B.L.'s interview. Oct. 19. Dallas.
MACHLUP, F. (1962) The Production and Distribution of Knowledge. Princeton,
   N.J.: Princeton University Press.
MANSFIELD, E. ( 1968) The Economics of Technological Change. New York: W. W.
   Norton.
MARX, K. (1970) Feuerbach: Opposition of the Naturalistic and Idealistic Outlook.
   New York: Beckman.
___ (1977) The Capital, Vol. 1. New York: Random House.
MEDAWAR, P. (1964) "Is the scientific paper fraudulent? yes; it misrepresents
   scientific thought." Saturday Review Aug. 1: 42-43.
MEITES, J. [ed.] (1970) Hypophysiotropic Hormones of the Hypothalamus. Balti-
   more: Williams and Wilkins.
___, DONOVAN, B., and McCANN, S. (1975) Pioneers in Neuroendocrinology.
   New York: Plenum Press.
MERRIFIELD, R.B. (1965) "Automated synthesis of peptides." Science 150 (8;
   Oct.): 178-189.
___ (1968) "The automatic synthesis of proteins." Scientific American 218 (3): 56-
   74.
MITROFF, I. I. (1974) The Subjective Side of Science. New York: Elsevier.
MONOD, J. (1970) Le hasard et la nécessité. Paris: Le Seuil.
MOORE, S. (1975) "Lyman C. Craig: in memoriam." Pp. 5-16 in Peptides:
   Chemistry; Structure; Biology. Ann Arbor: Ann Arbor Science Publishers.
___, SPACKMAN, D. H., and STEIN, W. H. (1958) "Automatic recording
   apparatus for use in the chromatography of amino acids." Federation Proceedings
   17 (Nov.): 1107-1115.
MORIN, E. (1977) La méthode. Paris: Le Seuil.
MULKAY, M. J. (1969) "Some aspects of cultural growth in the natural sciences."
   Social Research 36(1): 22-52.
___ (1972) The Social Process of Innovation. London: Macmillan.
___ (1974) 'Conceptual displacement and migration in science: a prefatory paper."
   Social Studies of Science 4: 205-234.
_____ (1975) "Norms and ideology in science." Social Science Information 15 (4/5):
   637-656.
___, GILBERT, G. N., and WOOLGAR, S. (1975) "Problem areas and research
   networks in science." Sociology 9: 187-203.
References                                                                       269

MULLINS, N. C. ( 1972) "The development of a scientific specialty: the Phage group
and origins of molecular biology.'' Minerva 10: 51-82.
___ (1973) Theory and Theory Groups in Contemporary American Sociology. New
   York: Harper and Row.
___ (1973b) "The development of specialties in social science: the case of
   ethnomethodology." Science Studies 3: 245-273.
NAIR, R.M.G., BARRETT, J. F., BOWERS, C. Y., and SCHALL Y, A. V. (1970)
   "Structure of porcine thyrotropine releasing hormone." Biochemistry 9: 1103.
NIETZSCHE, F. (1974a) Human, All Too Human. New York: Gordon Press.
___ (1974b) The Will to Power. New York: Gordon Press.
OLBY, R. (1974) The Path to the Double Helix. Seattle.: University of Washington
   Press.
ORGEL, L. E. (1973) The Origins of Life. New York: John Wiley.
PEDERSEN, K. O. (1974) "Svedberg and the early experiments: the ultra cen-
   trifuge." Fractious 1 (Beckman Instruments).
PLATO The Republic.
POINCARÉ, R. (1905) Science and Hypothesis. New York: Dover.
POPPER, K. (1961) The Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York: Basic Books.
PORATH, J. (9167) "The development of chromatography on molecular sieves."
    Laboratory Practice 16 (7).
PRICE, D. J. de SOLLA (1963) Little Science, Big Science. London: Columbia
    University Press.
.___ (1975) Science Since Babylon. London: Yale University Press.
RAVETZ, J. R. (1973) Scientific Knowledge and Its Social Problems. Harmonds-
    worth: Penguin.
REIF, F. (1961) "The competitive world of the pure scientist." Science 134 (3494):
    1957-1962.
RE SCHER, N. (1978) Scientific Progress: A Philosophical Essay on the Economics of
    Research in Natural Science. Oxford: Blackwell.
RODGERS, R. C. (1974) Radio Immuno Assay Theory for Health Care Profes-
    sionals. Hewlett Packard.
ROSE, H. and ROSE, J. [eds.] (1976) Ideology of/in the Natural Sciences. London:
    Macmillan.
RYLE, M. (1975) Letter to the Times, 4.12.
SACKS, H. (1972) "An initial investigation of the usability of conversational data for
   doing sociology." Pp. 31-74 in Sudnow (ed.) Studies in Social Interaction. New
   York: Free Press.
___, SCHEGLOFF, E. A., and JEFFERSON, G. (1974) "A simplest systematics
   for the organisation of turn-taking for conversation." Language 50: 696-735.
SALOMON BAYET, C. ( 1978) L'institution de la science, et l'expérience du vivant."
   Ch. 10. Paris: Flammarion.
SARTRE, J. P. (1943) L'Etre et le Néant. Paris: Gallimard.
SCHALLY, A. V. (1976) B.L.'s interview. Oct. 21. New Orléans.
___, AMIMURA, A., BOWERS, C. Y., KASTIN, A. J., SAWANO, S., and
    REDDING, T. W. (1968) "Hypothalamic neurohormones regulating anterior
   pituitary function." Recent Progress in Hormone Research 24: 497.
SCHALLY, A. V., ARIMURA, A., and KASTIN, A. J. (1973) "Hypothalamic
    regulatory hormones." Science 179 (Jan. 26): 341-350.
270                                                        LABORATORY LIFE


SCHALL Y, A. V., BOWERS, C. Y., REDDING, T. W., and BARRETT, J. F. ( 1966)
  "Isolation of thyrotropin releasing factor TRF from porcine hypothalami." Bio-
  chem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 25: 165.
SCHALLY, A. V., REDDING, T. W., BOWERS, C. Y. and BARRETT, J. F. ( 1969)
  "Isolation and properties of porcine thryrotropin releasing hormone." J. Biol.
  Chem. 244: 4077.
SCHARRER, E. and SCHARRER, B. (1963) Neuroendocrinology. New York:
  Columbia University Press.
SCHUTZ, A. (1953) "The problem of rationality in the social world." Economica
   10.
SERRES, M. (1972) L'interférence, Hermes II. Paris: Ed. de Minuit.
___ (1977a) La distribution, Hermès IV. Paris: Ed. de Minuit.
___ (1977b) La naissance de la physique dans la texte de Lucrèce: fleuves et
   turbulences. Paris: Ed. de Minuit.
SHAPIN, S. (forthcoming) "Homo Phrenologicus: anthropological perspectives on a
   historical problem." In Barnes and Shapin (eds.).
SILVERMAN, D. (1975) Reading Casteneda. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
SINGH, J. ( 1966) Information Theory, Language and Cybernetics. New York: Dover.
SOHN RETHEL, A. (1975) "Science as alienated consciousness." Radical Science
   Journal 2/3: 65-101.
SPACKMAN, N.D.H., STEIN, W. H., and MOORE, S. (1958) "Automatic
   recording apparatus for use in the chromatography of amino acids." Analytical
   Chemistry 30 (7): 1190-1206.
SPINOZA ( 1976) [ 1977] The Ethics. Appendix Part I. Secaucus, N.J.: Citadel Press.
SUDNOW, D. [ed.] (1972) Studies in Social Interaction. New York: Free Press.
SWATEZ, G. M. (1970) "The social organisation of a university laboratory."
   Minerva 8: 36-58.
TOBEY, R. (1977) "American grassland ecology 1895-1955: the life cycle of a
   professional research community." In Eggerton (ed.) The History of American
   Ecology. New York: Arno Press.
TUDOR, A. (1976) "Misunderstanding everyday life." Sociological Review 24: 479-
   503
VALE, W. (1976) "Messengers from the brain." Science Year 1976. Chicago:
   F.E.E.C.
WADE, N. (1978) "Three lap race to Stockholm." New Scientist April 27, May 4,
    May 11.
WAT ANABA, S. [ed.] (1969) Methodologies of Pattern Recognition. New York:
    Academic Press.
WATKINS, J.W.N. (1964) "Confession is good for ideas." Pp. 64-70 in Edge (ed.)
    Experiment: A Series of Scientific Case Studies. London: BBC.
WATSON, J. D. (1968) The Double Helix. New York: Atheneum.
.___ (1976) Molecular Biology of the Gene. Menlo Park, C A: W. A. Benjamin.
WHITLEY, R. D. ( 1972) "Black boxism and the sociology of science: a discussion of
    the major developments in the field." Sociological Review Monograph 18: 61-92.
 WILLIAMS, A.L. (1974) Introduction to Laboratory Chemistry: Organic and Biochem-
    istry. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
WILSON, B. [ed.] (1977) Rationality. Oxford: Blackwell.
References                                                                   271

WOOLGAR, S. W. ( 1976a) "Writing an intellectual history of scientific development:
   the use of discovery accounts." Social Studies of Science 6: 395-422.
___ (1976b) "Problems and possibilities in the sociological analysis of scientists'
   accounts." Paper presented at 4S/ISA Conference on the Sociology of Science.
   Cornell, New York, Nov. 4-6.
____ (1978) "The emergence and growth of research areas in science with special
   reference to research on pulsars." Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge.
WYNNE, B. ( 1976) "C. G. Barkla and the J phenomenon: a case study in the treatment
   of deviance in physics." Social Studies of Science 6: 307-347.
YALOW, R. S. and BERSON, S. A. (1971) "Introduction and general consideration."
   In E. Odell and O. Daughaday (eds.) Principles of Competitive Protein Binding
   Assays. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott.
YOUNG, B. (n. d.) "Science is social relations" (mimeographed).
This page intentionally left blank
     POSTSCRIPT TO SECOND EDITION ( 1 9 8 6 )


There is a traditional tendency to chase and hound the "real" meaning of
texts. Years after the initial publication of a volume, defenders and critics
alike continue to argue over "what was actually intended" by its authors.
As a welcome relief from this spectacle, literary theory has increasingly
disavowed this kind of textual criticism. The current trend is to permit texts
a life of their own. The "real" meaning of a text is recognised as an illusory
or, at least, infinitely renegotiable concept. As a result, "what the text
says," "what really happened" and "what the authors intended" are now
very much up to the reader. It is the reader who writes the text.
   Although this change has been most marked in the field of literary criticism, it clearly has a special relevance for the social study of science, which
takes as axiomatic the tentative, contingent character of objectification
practices. The construction of scientific facts, in particular, is a process of
generating texts whose fate (status, value, utility, facticity) depends on their
subsequent interpretation. In line with this notion of textual interpretation,
we shall not attempt a definitive restatement of the argument of Laboratory
Life, but instead offer comments on the nature of some of the criticisms of
the book and on the changes in the social study of science which these criticisms reflect.
   In early October 1975, one of us entered Professor Guillemin's laboratory for a two-year study of the Salk Institute. Professor Latour's knowledge
of science was non-existent; his mastery of English was very poor; and he
was completely unaware of the existence of the social studies of science.
Apart from (or perhaps even because of) this last feature, he was thus in the
classic position of the ethnographer sent to a completely foreign environment. Since the question has often been asked, it is useful to begin with a
few words about how he got to the Salk Institute in the first place.
   While in the Ivory Coast, as a researcher in the sociology of development
with the French research institution ORSTOM, he had been asked to explain
why it was so difficult for black executives to adapt to modern industrial life
(Latour, 1973). He found a vast literature on African philosophy and in
comparative anthropology. Right from the start, however, it seemed that
many features were attributed a little too quickly to the African "mind,"
and that these could be more simply explained by social factors. For exam-

                                                                           273
274                                                          LABORATORY LIFE


ple, the young boys in technical schools were accused by their white teachers of being unable to "see in three dimensions." This was regarded as a
serious deficiency. It turned out, however, that the school system (an exact
replica of the French system) introduced engineering drawing to its pupils
before they did any practical work on engines. Since the boys mostly came
from country districts and had never seen or handled an engine before, the
interpretation of the drawings presented them with quite a puzzle. As the
study proceeded, the established preference for far-fetched cognitive explanations over simpler social ones became more evident. A terrible doubt
arose: perhaps the entire literature on cognitive abilities was fundamentally
wrong. It was especially troubling that every study depended on a distinction between scientific and prescientific reasoning. Stimulated by interaction with remarkable anthropologists like Marc Augé and other colleagues
at ORSTOM, a rudimentary research programme took shape. What would
happen to the Great Divide between scientific and prescientific reasoning if
the same field methods used to study Ivory Coast farmers were applied to
first-rate scientists? Two years before, the would-be anthropologist of science had met Professor Guillemin (like him, a native of Burgundy). Guillemin praised the openness of the Salk Institute and had invited him to carry
out an epistemological study of his laboratory, providing he secured his own
source of funding. It is worth acknowledging Guillemin's unusual generosity in providing total access to his laboratory and his forbearance in taking
in (someone he took to be) an "epistemologist" (Dr. Jekyll) who subsequently turned into a sociologist of science (Mr. Hyde). 1
   When the first edition of Laboratory Life appeared in 1979, it was surprising to realise that this was the first attempt at a detailed study of the daily
activities of scientists in their natural habitat. The scientists in the laboratory
were probably more surprised than anyone that this was the only study of its
kind. To them, our arguments about the need for such studies were obvious.
"How could anyone ignore the details of our daily work?" they quipped.
So their main reaction to the book (apart from carefully scrutinising the
pseudonymous quotations we used) was that it was all rather unsurprising,
if not trivial. Although this reaction is a nice confirmation of the accuracy
of our observations, this is not our point. The scientists were much more
attracted to Wade's subsequent (1981) rendering of the Guillemin-Schally
controversies. Wade's book is an interesting, although very one-sided (pro
Schally) account, but its chief value is in demonstrating the difference between good scientific journalism and the sociological study of science.
Wade's sense of outrage is evident throughout as he delightedly portrays the
ways in which the "rules of scientific method" were broken. The very ep-
PostScript                                                                    275


isodes we avoided because they were too obviously "social" (in the limited
sense of scandal-mongering and making "cheap shots") are highlighted by
Wade's book. The prolongation of the dispute in Wade's account better approximated the scientists' more prurient interests than did ours. Clearly, our
book was intended for a rather different audience.
  Within the general community of scholars interested in theories of science, the novelty of the book's approach was also something of a surprise.
Despite subsequent modifications (Kuhn, 1970) of his position, Kuhn
(1962) had already provided (although perhaps unwittingly-see Kuhn,
1984) the general basis for a conception of the social character of science,
and Barnes (1974) and Bloor (1976) had set the agenda for a "strong programme" in the sociology of scientific knowledge. The antipathy of many
writers to the treatment of science as a "black box" was well established.
We might thus have expected participant observation studies to be an integral feature of the wave of neo-Kuhnian analyses which characterised the
sociology of science in the 1970s. But calls for full-blooded sociology of
science were not immediately met by participant observation studies. Few
had spent a significant amount of time in close proximity with the day-today activities of working scientists. 2
   With the benefit of hindsight, it is possible to place this initial failure of
nerve in perspective. Of course, any ethnographer (or participant observer)
will testify to the taxing demands of entering and living in a strange culture.
The esoteric culture of the scientific laboratory provides particularly daunting problems, both conceptual and practical. For example, the problem of
maintaining analytic distance is acute for the ethnographer of science because his own (native) culture is itself infused with notions of what science
is like. More significant, perhaps, is the fact that the sociology of science of
the late 1970s responded rather slowly to some of the implications of
Kuhn's work. It is well known that Kuhn's work coincided with a fundamental re-evaluation of preconceptions about the "special" character of
science, one particular consequence of which was a change of focus in the
social study of science. Instead of studying relationships between scientists,
the reward system and institutional affiliations, the trend was to demonstrate
the fundamentally social character of the objects, facts and discoveries of
science. The sociology of science became a sociology of scientific knowledge.
   Less well realised, perhaps, is that the same re-evaluation of preconceptions about science also has implications for the methods and techniques
adopted by the social study of science. The revision of epistemological preconceptions about science raises awkward questions about the nature of its
276                                                       LABORATORY LIFE


social analysis. Can we go on being instrumentally realist in our own research practices while proclaiming the need to demystify this tendency
among natural scientists? Should we be vocal about the social processes of
science, hitherto hidden from view, and yet silent about the social processes
of our own research? The hesitant, differential response to this deep-rooted
issue partly accounts for the proliferation of research perspectives which has
accompanied the release from pre-Kuhnian orthodoxy. Although generally
united in their disdain for the traditional ("received") view of science,
practitioners of the new social study of scientific knowledge differ markedly
in their methodological styles and preferences (see for example the collection of papers in Knorr-Cetina and Mulkay, 1983). The differential response to the revision of epistemological preconceptions also begins to account for the variation of responses to Laboratory Life.3
   A general complaint about the book concerned its indiscipline. One reviewer remarked that reading Laboratory Life was "rather like taking an extremely bumpy ride over fascinating terrain" (Westrum, 1982: 438). Apart
from noting the omission of a detailed table of contents and the absence of
an index (both faults rectified in this edition), Westrum speaks of a lack of
a sense of unity, the lack of continuous action and the relative incoherence
of the narrative. But our aim was precisely to avoid giving the kind of
smoothed narrative characteristic of traditional constructions of the "way
things are." For example, we did not want an account in which the early
presentation of dramatis personnae implied that humans were to be taken as
the primary category of actors within the laboratory. Westrum himself notes
the congruence between the form of our report and the process we describe
in the laboratory: "Like the animal brains which get chopped up in the
course of the researchers' work, the human struggle of the researchers to
advance science and their own careers is chopped up so that Latour and
Woolgar can examine and classify the interactions between them" (Westrum, 1982: 438). A more prosaic explanation of the form of Laboratory
Life stems from the nature of collaboration between a French philosopher
and a British sociologist. In the best tradition of innovation through hybridisation, the authors found themselves continually rediscovering and renegotiating the significance of the cultural divide known (chauvinistically)
as the English Channel. From this process emerged an uneasy (but evidently
fruitful) compromise of styles.
   The more substantive criticisms of the book range over a variety of issues, of which the most important are summarised below. Rather than using
space to develop a full scale rebuttal of each point, we offer brief comments
about their significance and the problems they pose for future work.
Postscript                                                                  277

How Radical is Radical?
   While enthusiastically welcoming the detailed empirical demonstration
of the argument that no part of science is beyond sociological analysis, some
marxist scholars are critical that Laboratory? Life is ultimately the product of
a ''bourgeois sociology of science" (Stewart, 1982: 133). Given the demonstration that scientific facts are formulated in the denial and obliteration
of their own historicity, given that the internal relations of science can be
described as distinctively capitalist, these critics are disappointed that we
did not go on to ask why this is so. They complain that we fail to examine
the connection between the construction of scientific facts and the hierarchical and exploitative relations of science and the class divisions of society
as a whole. Laboratory Life is accused of espousing an idealist relativism
whereby the absence of socio-economic analysis reduces material reality to
 "the almost arbitrary vicissitudes of human subjectivity" (Stewart, 1982:
 135)
    "Relativism" is evidently the bogey of this particular brand of radicalism. Indeed, there is a tendency to use it indiscriminately, for example, to
fail to appreciate the distinction between relativism and constructivism. But
the weakness of marxist analyses of science is their desire for a scientific/
objective point of view. The proponents of marxist analyses of science need
a critique of objectivity so as to make room for their radical science, but they
also want a "real science" with which to ground this radical science (Latour, 1982a: 137; see also Wolff, 1981). The call for a macro-social analysis
of the way in which the social relations of production lead scientists "to select from and shape nature in a particular way" (Stewart, 1982: 135) claims
for marxist science the very privileges it denies to bourgeois science.


What Does It Mean to be Ethnographic?
   The idea of an ethnographic study of scientific practice has given rise to
a body of work which has come to be called "laboratory studies."4 The
common assumption of these studies is that our understanding of science
can profitably draw upon experiences gained while immersed in the day-today activities of working scientists. However, beyond this there is little consensus as to what can and should be made of these experiences. In Laboratory Life, we indicated that our use of the term "anthropology of science"
was intended to denote the presentation of preliminary empirical material,
our desire to retrieve something of the craft character of science, the necessity to bracket our familiarity with the object of study, and our desire to in-
278                                                         LABORATORY LIFE


corporate a degree of "reflexivity" into our analysis. Now these features
only correspond to the requirements of traditional ethnography in a rather
general way. To call something ethnographic traditionally requires that we
include a description of the tribe's ecology, technology and belief systems.
But, as Knorr-Cetina (1982a: 40) has noted, this particular interpretation of
"ethnography" has been heavily criticised within anthropology. A more
general interpretation of the call for ethnography denotes the need for detailed empirical observations and field notes, especially where these include
information about sources of funding, the career backgrounds of participants, the citation patterns in the relevant literature, the nature and origins
of instrumentation and so on. These are necessary, in one view (Latour,
1982b), if we are to proceed to a comparative analysis of the local settings
of fact production. An alternative view is that such details are necessary, not
so much for comparative purposes, but because any attempt to grapple with
the problems of describing science proceeds best from an empirical base.
   In our original use of the term, we particularly stressed the utility of an
"ethnographic" approach for maintaining analytic distance upon explanations of activity prevalent within the culture being observed. In the case
of a scientific culture in particular, there is a strong tendency for the objects
of that culture (facts) to provide their own explanation. Rather than produce
an account which explained scientists' activities in terms of the facts which
they discovered, our interest was to determine how a fact came to acquire
its character in the first place. Lynch (1982) points out that our strategy corresponds to Schutz's (1944) recommendation that sociology adopt the perspective of the stranger, whereby the problems of making sense of an alien
culture provide insights into those aspects of culture taken for granted by its
members.
   Lynch notes, as we ourselves do, that the technical practices of laboratory
science involve the assessment of the relationship between "objective" and
"socio-historical" states of affairs (Lynch, 1985b). However, Lynch
stresses that this assessment by scientists (which he calls endogenous critical inquiry) operates independently of any professional sociological interest
and does not rely solely upon approved social science methods (Lynch,
 1982: 501). By contrast, the efforts of the social scientist, of which the use
of the stranger device is one example, draw upon the stranger's own analytic
competences as a social scientist. As a result, says Lynch, our use of anthropological strangeness produces a "disengaged" analysis which severs "the
transitivity of technical practices to their real-worldly objects of study"
(Lynch, 1982: 503).
   What is the sense of "disengaged" in Lynch's usage? For Lynch, the
PostScript                                                                  279

competences of the sociologist are fundamentally distinct from those of the
scientist, and the relationship between the two is problematic. As evidence
of this distinctiveness, Lynch cites the failure of our "observer" (see especially Chapter 2) to perform the practices of the laboratory competently,
as well as disputes between the observer and his informants, his lack of understanding of the technical reports and so on. Lynch argues that whatever
distinguishes social scientific practices from those of the scientist is yet to
be discovered.
    Lynch's criticism depends both on a rigid distinction between insider
(scientist) and outsider (observer) and upon a rather idealistic notion about
the possibility of distinctively assigning competences to these categories.
Whereas we began by wishing to avoid this distinction i.e. by not wanting
to presume the principled difference between scientist and non-scientist,
Lynch points out that the stranger device entails our use of this distinction.
Lynch himself assumes the difference and complains that our reports of the
observer's experiences exemplify a failure adequately to document the
practices of the scientist. Lynch displays a commitment to an (actual) objective character of the technical practices and the real worldly objects of
study. Although his criticism is a salient warning against sociology-centrism, it is unclear what would count as an adequately "engaged" account
of scientists' technical practices.5
   Our current position on the notion of "ethnography" is slightly different.
Its main advantage is that unlike many kinds of sociology (especially marxist), the anthropologist does not know the nature of the society under study,
nor where to draw the boundaries between the realms of technical, social,
scientific, natural and so on. This additional freedom in defining the nature
of the laboratory counts for much more than the artificial distance which one
takes with the observed. This kind of anthropological approach can be used
on any occasion when the composition of the society under study is uncertain. It is not necessary to travel to foreign countries to obtain this effect,
even though this is the only way that many anthropologists have been able
to achieve "distance." Indeed, this approach may very well be compatible
with a close collaboration with the scientists and engineers under study. We
retain from "ethnography" the working principle of uncertainty rather than
the notion of exoticism.

The Place of Philosophy
  It is part of the folk wisdom of the field that historians have been increasingly enthusiastic about new developments in the sociology of scientific
280                                                        LABORATORY LIFE


knowledge while philosophers of science have remained more resistant.
Certainly, there has been a marked antipathy to some forms of philosophy
by sociologists. Philosophy bashing perhaps reached its apogee with
Bloor's (1976: 45) comment that "to ask questions of the sort which philosophers address to themselves is usually to paralyse the mind." Since the
debate between Bloor (1981) and Laudan (1981), however, some philosophers have evinced sympathy for the work of the sociology of scientific
knowledge (for example, Nickles, 1982, 1984). This suggests that it is perhaps no longer productive to dismiss all attempts at philosophising science
(Knorr-Cetina, 1982a).
   One good reason for not dismissing philosophy is that the positions of
most authors both within and beyond the social study of science are based
on deep-seated ontological commitments rather than upon any empirical account of science. This is why empirical evidence (of the sort provided by
Laboratory Life) is unlikely to change any minds. And this is why those
who read the book through realist spectacles will see error (for example,
Bazerman, 1980: 17). It is instead necessary to examine the very roots of
these ontologies and to attempt to develop an alternative (Latour, 1984,
 1986a). However, the particular branch of philosophy-epistemology-
which holds that the only source of knowledge are ideas of reason intrinsic
to the mind, is an area whose total extinction is overdue. The redundancy of
epistemology is well established by flourishing sociological, historical and
(other) philosophical analyses of knowledge, despite its constant assertion
(directed in particular at the work of Bachelard and his French followers) of
the impossibility of these disciplines. It is not that we need to apportion subject matter between epistemology and naturalistic studies of science and
technology; the work of the latter is a dissipation of the former. So Laboratory Life is neither an attempt to develop an alternative epistemology nor
is it an attack on philosophy. Perhaps the best way to express our position is
by proposing a ten-year moratorium on cognitive explanations of science.
If our French epistemologist colleagues are sufficiently confident in the paramount importance of cognitive phenomena for understanding science, they
will accept the challenge. We hereby promise that if anything remains to be
explained at the end of this period, we too will turn to the mind!
   Perhaps the most interesting (philosophical) interpretation of our work is
 an attempt to enroll Laboratory Life as a confirmation (!) of the falsificationist theory of science. In this view, Laboratory Life constitutes "a strik-
 ing corroboration" of Popperian philosophy of science (Tilley, 1981: 118):
 (our description of) the amount of effort invested by scientists in undermin-
 ing each others' claims is the best proof that science is fundamentally dif-
PostScript                                                                  281

ferent from every day common sense. Debates in everyday life are not settled by using huge laboratories and carefully staged controversies.
   Tilley's boomerang (but nonetheless plausible) interpretation of our argument is useful because it reveals two basic flaws in our work. First, although it was originally both necessary and desirable, the laboratory should
not be studied as an isolated unit; it is only one part of a wider story. The
other part examines the way in which a laboratory becomes an obligatory
reference point in all discussions. Not until the inner workings of the laboratory are studied in conjunction with the strategic positioning of the laboratory in society can Tilley's kidnapping manoeuvre be resisted. The full
story will establish that there is a continuum between controversies in daily
life and those occurring in the laboratory, and the investigation of this continuum will explain why more resources are needed in a laboratory than is
usually necessary in a pub (Latour, 1986a and b). Second, Tilley demonstrates that the resources at our disposal are insufficient to force our particular interpretation in preference to any other. At almost no cost, Tilley has
been able to produce a diammetrically opposed interpretation of the one we
intended (see p. 284).


The Demise of the "Social"
   A misunderstanding which has been more consequential with the expansion of social studies of science, concerns the use of the word "social."
Given our explicit disavowal of "social factors" in the first chapter, it is
clear that our continued use of the term was ironic. So what does it mean to
talk about "social" construction? There is no shame in admitting that the
term no longer has any meaning. "Social" retained meaning when used by
Mertonians to define a realm of study which excluded consideration of ''scientific" content. It also had meaning in the Edinburgh school's attempts to
explain the technical content of science (by contrast with internalist explanations of technical content). In all such uses, "social" was primarily a
term of antagonism, one part of a binary opposition. But how useful is it
once we accept that all interactions are social? What does the term "social"
convey when it refers equally to a pen's inscription on graph paper, to the
construction of a text and to the gradual elaboration of an amino-acid chain?
Not a lot. By demonstrating its pervasive applicability, the social study of
science has rendered "social" devoid of any meaning (cf. Latour 1986a and
b). Although this was also our original intention, it was not clear until now
that we could simply ditch the term: our new subtitle now denotes our interest in "the construction of scientific facts."
282                                                        LABORATORY LIFE


Reflexivity
   We earlier noted that one of our original concerns was to produce an
"ethnographic" study which incorporated a degree of reflexivity. We also
suggested that the diversity of reaction to Laboratory Life corresponded to
a deep-seated ambivalence about the character and status of work in the social study of science, especially where this recognises itself as the construction of fictions about fiction construction. It is interesting, however, that
most "laboratory studies" tended to adopt an instrumental rather than reflexive conception of ethnography (Woolgar, 1982). The current programmatic slogan of many laboratory studies (also common to much social study
of science more generally) is the injunction to study science as it happens.
In one sense of this clause, the work of laboratory studies is an attempt to
produce a description of scientific work relatively unhindered by retrospective reconstruction: contemporaneous monitoring of scientific activity enables the analyst to base discussion on first-hand experiences rather than to
rely on recollections made in the light of subsequent events. In a second
sense, the study of science as it happens enables the analyst to bypass intermediary constructions arising from reliance on informants in situations removed from their everyday working environment. Thus, in situ observation
provides more direct access to events in the laboratory than, for example,
interview responses. In both cases, the general idea is that more is to be
gained from being on the spot than from attempting interpretation from a
secondary perspective. The in situ monitoring of contemporaneous scientific activity portrays the scientist located firmly at the laboratory bench and
treats with some scepticism the kind of representations provided by the scientist, especially where these are produced in situations removed (either
temporally or contextually) from the scene of the scientific action.
   The straightforward interpretation of the "as it happens" clause implies
that laboratory studies yield a "better" or "more accurate" picture of science than those studies relying on "distorted" versions preferred by actors
removed from the scene. Undoubtedly, this line of argument is of some
value, for example, in negotiating access to laboratories. Some scientists
attach considerable weight to a contrast between, for example, "what philosophers like Popper say about science" and "what actually goes on in science." Yet the adoption of this line of argument for analytic purposes is
both arrogant and entirely misleading. It presumes privileged access to the
"real truth" about science and it suggests that this truth will eventually
emerge from closer and more detailed observation of technical practices (cf.
Gieryn, 1982). It thereby ignores the very phenomenon in need of investi-
PostScript                                                                   283

gation-namely the ways in which descriptions and reports of observations
are variously presented (and received) as "good enough," "inadequate,"
"distorted," "real," "accurate" and so on.
  A more reflexive appreciation of laboratory studies is less dismissive of
what might be called "the problem of fallibility": the argument that all
forms of description, report, observation and so on can always be undermined. However, instead of using this argument ironically (Woolgar,
1983), as a way of characterising the work of others (scientists or other sociologists) while implying that our own recommended alternative is free
from such deficiencies, we should accept the universal applicability of fallibility and find ways of coming to terms with it. Instead of utilizing it in a
merely critical role, the aim would be to retain and constantly draw attention
to the phenomenon in the course of description and analysis. We might as
well admit that as a "problem" it is both insoluble and unavoidable, and
that even efforts to examine how it is avoided are doomed in that they entail
an attempt to avoid it. 7 We need to explore forms of literary expressive
whereby the monster can be simultaneously kept at bay and allowed a position at the heart of our enterprise. 8
   Of course, one interesting aspect of the exploration of reflexivity is that
our writing is conventionally constrained by the use of report-like formats.
This increases the tendency for ethnographies to be read as straightforwardly reporting on the "actual" state of affairs to be found in the laboratory. This kind of reading is not without value. Some will discover in this
reading aspects of the world of scientific work of which they were previously unaware. But such reading misses the point. We attempted (especially
in Chapter 2) to address the issue of reflexivity by placing the burden of observational experience on the shoulders of a mythical "observer." We attempted to alert the reader to the nature of his relationship with the text (and
by implication to the nature of readers' relationships with all attempts to
constitute objectivities through textual expression). For example, Photograph 1 (p. 93) is labelled "View from the laboratory roof." Now, presumably, a determinedly instrumentally minded reader will take this at face
value, and go away happy that he is better informed about the character of
laboratory roofs (and views therefrom). For such readers we are naturally
pleased to increase their sum of knowledge about the world. But, unfortunately, much would have been lost. We hoped that the inclusion of such a
photograph might at least make such readers stop and think about what is
involved in the juxtaposition of textual imagery, and how this affects the
reader's relationship with the "facts" as represented by the text. Our concerns for reflexivity would perhaps have begun to succeed where the text
284                                                         LABORATORY LIFE


suggests to the reader that he ask himself whether or not the observations
really took place, whether or not Jonas Salk really wrote the introduction,
and so on.
   Reflexivity is thus a way of reminding the reader that all texts are stories.
This applies as much to the facts of our scientists as to the fictions ''through
which" we display their work. The story like quality of texts denotes the
essential uncertainty of their interpretation: the reader can never "know for
sure." We mentioned already the value of ethnography in stressing this uncertainty. Here we see that reflexivity is the ethnographer of the text.

Conclusion
   The concluding chapter of Laboratory Life addresses the status of our
own account, the question of whether or not we are (merely) supplying a
new fiction (about science) for old. In the closing section of the original
draft we declared that our analysis was "ultimately unconvincing." We
asked readers of the text not to take its contents seriously. But our original
publishers insisted that we remove the sentence because, they said, they
were not in the habit of publishing anything that "proclaimed its own
worthlessness."
   It should be clear that we never claimed that our account is more privileged than those of our scientist-informants, nor that it is immune from
criticism. But this statement, like the sentence excluded from the original
draft, has often been interpreted as self-defeating: how could we not believe
in our own account? How can we relativise both natural sciences and our
own relativistic story? Clearly, readers can miss the point of the reflexivity
and hear only apology and self contradiction. But the statement is only an
aporia from the point of view of those who believe in the intrinsic existence
of accurate and fictitious accounts per se. And this is precisely the point of
view we dispute. For this reason, the final sentence of the first edition
(which reappears as the last sentence of this postscript) tries to anticipate the
amount of work necessary to make our interpretation more likely than
others. It is a reminder that the value and status of any text (construction,
fact, claim, story, this account) depend on more than its supposedly "inherent" qualities. As we suggested earlier, the degree of accuracy (or fiction) of an account depends on what is subsequently made of the story, not
on the story itself. This is the fundamental principle we showed to be a work
in the modalising and demodalising of statements. Laboratory Life is once
again in the hands of its readers, exactly like TRF, TRH, Somatostatin and
the other fact(or)s we discussed. It is others who transform the status of
PostScript                                                                                   285

these claims, making them more or less factual, dismembering them, incorporating them into black-boxes for different argumentative purposes, ridiculing them and so on. There is neither self-contradiction nor self-defeat in
recognising this common destiny of all claims. On the contrary, once the
common fate of claims is recognised, it becomes easier to understand the
differences in predicting each reader's behaviour. Each text, laboratory, author and discipline strives to establish a world in which its own interpretation is made more likely by virtue of the increasing number of people from
whom it extracts compliance. In other words, interpretations do not so much
inform as perform. From this perspective, our scientists are obviously better
equipped at performing the world we live in than we are at deconstructing
it. The recognition of this vast difference is in no way self-defeating. It
merely acknowledges the present balance of forces. How much further research, investment, redefinition of the field, and transformation of what
counts as an acceptable argument are necessary to make this account more
plausible than its alternatives?



                                          NOTES

   1 Which is the bad guy? Readers are invited to transpose the identities here The important
point is that a metamorphosis occurred
   2 Fleck's (1979) account of the way in which the Wasserman reaction came to be related to
syphillis is now widely acknowledged to have predated this trend, having been originally published in German in 1935 Westrum ( 1982) has suggested that Perry's (1966) study of psychiatric research also anticipates the conclusions of Laboratory Life.
   3 Reviews and review articles which discuss Laboratory Life are listed in Additional References (p 287), denoted by an asterisk ( * ) Many ''laboratory studies'' (see note 4) also include a critical evaluation of Laboratory Life.
   4 For reviews of the field of "laboratory studies" see, for example, Knorr-Cetina, 1983;
Woolgar, 1982 Empirical analyses falling under the "laboratory studies" rubric include investigations of the following substantive areas: neuroendocrinology (Latour and Woolgar,
 1979; Latour, 1980, 1981), plant protein research (Knorr, 1977, 1979; Knorr-Cetina, 1981,
 1982a, 1982b), brain science (Lynch, 1982, 1985a, 1985b), psychophysiology (Star, 1983),
particle physics (Traweek, 1980, 1981, forthcoming), solid state physics (Woolgar, 1981a,
 1981b, forthcoming), colloid chemistry (Zenzen and Restivo, 1982), catalytic chemistry
(Boardman, 1980), cell biology (Law and Williams, 1981, 1982; Williams and Law, 1980),
wildlife biology (McKegney, 1982) and limnology (Grenier, 1982, 1983) In addition, a number of articles provide general discussions of the importance of "anthropological approaches"
to science (Anderson, 1981; Elkana, 1981; Lepenies, 1981) but tend neither to refer to, nor
make use of, specific empirical work A further detailed study of an individual scientist's experiences , but which fails to address the social process of laboratory work, is Goodfield (1981)
286                                                                      LABORATORY LIFE


   5 In a marvellously detailed account of the work of a neurosciences laboratory, Lynch himself does not claim to have achieved more than "the most speculative grasp of neuroscientific
work within the monstrously difficult strictures of Garfinkel's program" (Lynch, 1985b: 128)
   6 A recent meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (New
York, Summer 1984) included a session entitled "Laboratory Studies: What Scientists Really
Do."
   7. The "linguistic turn" in science studies can be glossed as the attempt to topicalise the
ways in which scientists themselves do the work of interpretation despite the problem of fallibility For example, the focus of "discourse analysis" is upon scientists' organisation of meaning, given the interpretive flexibility of, and variation between, their accounts (for example,
Mulkay et al , 1983; Gilbert and Mulkay, 1984) Such studies fail the requirements of reflexivity to the extent that they purport to reveal (non-ironically) the actual discourse practices of
scientists For a general review of the large volume of different approaches to scientific texts,
see Callon et al , 1986
   8 Some recent attempts to pursue this line are Ashmore (1985), Mulkay ( 1984) and Woolgar
(1984)
                    ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
* denotes review (or review article) of Laboratory Life

ANDERSON, R S (1981) "The necessity of field methods in the study of scientific re-
   search '' Pp 213-244 in Mendelsohn and Elkana (1981)
ASHMORE, MALCOLM (1985) A Question of Reflexivity: Wrighting Sociology of Scien-
   tific Knowledge Unpublished Ph D thesis University of York
* AUSTIN, J (1982) Social Science and Medicine 16: 931-934
* BAZERMAN, CHARLES ( 1980) 4S Newsletter 5: 14-19
* BEARMAN, DAVID (1979) Science 206: 824-825
BERGER, P L and LUCKMAN, T (1971) The Social Construction of Reality Harmonds-
   worth: Penguin
BLOOR, DAVID (1981) "The strengths of the strong programme '' Philosophy of the Social
   Sciences 11: 173-198
BOARDMAN, M (1980) The Sociology of Science and Laboratory Research Practice: Some
   New Perspectives in the Social Construction of Scientific Knowledge B Sc dissertation,
   Brunei University
BORGES, J L (1981) "Pierre Menard, author of The Quixote " Pp 96-103 in Borges: A
   Reader Ed E R Monegal and A Reid New York: E P Dutton
CALLÓN, MICHEL, LAW, JOHN and RIP, ARIE [eds ] (1986) Texts and Their Powers
   London: Macmillan
* COZZENS, SUSAN (1980) 4S Newsletter 5: 19-21
ELKANA, YEHUDA (1981) "A programmatic attempt at an anthropology of knowledge "
   Pp 1-76 in Mendelshon and Elkana (1981)
FLECK, LUDWIG (1979) The Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact, translation by
   F Bradley and T J Trenn of 1935 German edition Chicago: The University of Chicago
   Press.
GIERYN, T (1982) "Relativist/constructivist programmes in the sociology of science: re-
   dundance and retreat." Social Studies of Science 12: 279-297.
GILBERT, G NIGEL and MULKAY, MICHAEL (1984) Opening Pandora's Box Cam-
   bridge: Cambridge University Press
GOODFIELD, JUNE (1981) An Imagined World New York: Harper and Row
GRENIER, M (1982) Toward An Understanding of the Role of Social Cognition in Scientific
   Inquiry: Investigations in a Limnology Laboratory M A dissertation, McGill University
* (1983) "Cognition and social construction in laboratory science " 4S Review 1 (3): 2-
    16
*HARAWAY, D (1980) Isis 71: 488-489
KNORR, K D (1977) "Producing and reproducing knowledge: descriptive or constructive?
   Towards a model of research production." Social Science Information 16: 699-696.
*--- (1979) "Tinkering toward success: prelude to a theory of scientific practice " Theory
   and Society 8: 347-376.
* and KROHN, R and WHITLEY, R D [eds ] (1980) The Social Process of Scientific
   Investigation Sociology of the Sciences Yearbook, Vol 4 Dordrecht and Boston, Mass :
   Reidel

                                                                                      287
288                                                                     LABORATORY LIFE


KNORR-CETINA, KARIN D (1981) The Manufacture of Knowledge: An Essay on the Con-
   structivist and Contextual Nature of Science Oxford: Pergammon
---- (1982a) "Reply to my critics ''Society for the Social Studies of Science Newsletter 7
   (4): 40-48.
---- (1982b) "Scientific communities or transepistemic arenas of research? A critique of
   quasi-economic models of science." Social Studies of Science 12: 101-130.
---- (1983) "The ethnographic study of scientific work: towards a constructivist interpre-
   tation of science " Pp 116-140 in Knorr-Cetina and Mulkay (1983)
---- and MULKAY, MICHAEL (1983) [eds ] Science Observed: Perspectives on the So-
   cial Study of Science London: Sage
KUHN, T. S. (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press.
---- (1970) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions Second Edition, Enlarged Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press
---- (1984) "Reflections on receiving the John Desmond Bernal Award " 4S Review 1 (4):
   26-30.
* KROHN, R (1981) Contemporary Sociology 10: 433-434
LAUDAN, LARRY (1981) "The pseudo-science of science?" Philosophy of the Social Sci-
   ences 11: 173-198.
LATOUR, BRUNO (1973) "Les idéologies de la competence en milieu industriel à Abidjan "
   Cahiers Orstrom Sciences Humaines 9: 1-174
---- (1980) "Is it possible to reconstruct the research process? The sociology of a brain
   peptide." Pp. 53-73 in Knorr et al. (1980).
---- (1981) "Who is agnostic or What could it mean to study science?" in H Kuklick and
   R Jones (eds ), Knowledge and Society: Research in Sociology of Knowledge, Sciences
   and Art. London: JAI Press.
---- (1982a) "Reply to John Stewart," Radical Science Journal 12: 137-140
---- (1982b) Review of Karin Knorr-Cetina's The Manufacture of Knowledge Society for
   Social Studies of Science Newsletter 7 (4): 30-34
---- (1983) "Give me a laboratory and I will raise the world." Pp 141-170 in Knorr-Cetina
   and Mulkay (1983)
---- (1984) Les Microbes: Guerre et Paix suivi par Irréductions Paris: A M Metailie et
   Pandore.
---- (1986a) The Pasteurisation of French Society, translated by Alan Sheridan Cam-
   bridge, Mass : Harvard University Press
---- (1986b) Science in Action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society
   Milton Keynes: Open University Press
LAW, J and WILLIAMS, R J (1981) "Social structure and laboratory practice " Paper read
   at conference on Communication in Science, Simon Eraser University, 1-2 September
---- ( 1982) ''Putting facts together: a study of scientific persuasion ' ' Social Studies of Sci-
   ence 12:535-557
LEPENIES, W (1981) "Anthropological perspectives in the sociology of science " Pp 245-
   261 in Mendelsohn and Elkana (1981)
* LIN, K C , LIESHOUT, P v , MOL, A , PEKELHARING, P and RADDER, H (1982)
   Krisis: Tijdschrift voor Filosofie 8: 88-96
* LONG, D (1980) American Scientist 68: 583-584
LYNCH, MICHAEL E (1982) "Technical work and critical inquiry: investigations in scien-
   tific laboratory " Social Studies of Science 12: 499-533
Additional References                                                                      289

LYNCH, MICHAEL (1985a) "Discipline and the material form of images: an analysis of sci-
   entific visibility " Social Studies of Science 15: 37-66
---- (1985b) Art and Artifact in Laboratory Science: A Study of Shop Work an Shop Talk
   in a Research Laboratory London: Routledge and Kegan Paul
McKEGNEY, DOUG (1982) Local Action and Public Discourse in Animal Ecology: a com-
   muncations analysis of scientific inquiry M A dissertation, Simon Fraser University
MENDELSOHN, E and ELKANA, Y [eds ] (1981) Sciences and Cultures Sociology of the
   Sciences Yearbook, Vol. 5. Dordrecht and Boston, Mass.: Reidel.
MULKAY, MICHAEL (1984) "The scientist talks back: a one-act play, with a moral, about
   replication in science and reflexivity in sociology " Social Studies of Science 14: 265-282
---- POTTER, JONATHAN and YEARLEY, STEVEN (1983) "Why an analysis of sci-
   entific discourse is needed " Pp 171-203 in Knorr-Cetina and Mulkay (1983)
* MULLINS, N (1980) Science Technology and Human Values 30: 5
NICKLES, THOMAS (1982) Review of Karin Knorr-Cetina's The Manufacture of Knowl-
   edge Society for Social Studies of Science Newsletter 7 (4): 35-39
--- ( 1984) " A revolution that failed: Collins and Pinch on the paranormal ' ' Social Studies
   of Science 14:297-308
PERRY, STEWART E (1966) The Human Nature of Science: Researchers at Work in Psy-
   chiatry New York: Macmillan
SCHUTZ, ALFRED (1944) "The Stranger " American Journal of Sociology 50: 363-376 Re-
   printed pp 91-105 in Schutz, Collected Papers II: Studies in Social Theory, ed Arvid Brod-
   ersen ( 1964) The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
STAR, SUSAN LEIGH (1983) "Simplification in scientific work: an example from neuro-
   scientific research " Social Studies of Science 13: 205-228
* STEWART, J (1982) "Facts as commodities?" Radical Science Journal 12: 129-140
* THEMAAT, V V ( 1982) Zeitschrift für allgemeine Wissenschafstheorie 13: 166-170
TIBBETTS, PAUL and JOHNSON, PATRICIA (forthcoming) "The discourse and praxis
   models in recent reconstructions of scientific knowledge generation " Social Studies of Sci-
   ence
* TILLEY, N. (1981) "The logic of laboratory life." Sociology 15: 117-126.
TRAWEEK, SHARON (1980) "Culture and the organisation of scientific research in Japan
   and the United States " Journal of Asian Affairs 5: 135-148
---- ( 1981 ) "An anthropological study of the construction of time in the high energy phys-
   ics community " Paper, Program in Science, Technology and Society, Massachusetts In-
   stitute of Technology
---- (forthcoming) Particle Physics Culture: Buying Time and Taking Space
WADE NICHOLAS ( 1981 ) The Nobel Duel New York: Doubleday
WILLIAMS, R J and LAW J (1980) "Beyond the bounds of credibility " Fundamenta
   Scientiae 1: 295-315
* WESTRUM, R. (1982) Knowledge 3 (3): 437-439.
* WOLFF, R D (1981) "Science, empiricism and marxism: Latour and Woolgar vs E P
   Thompson " Social Text 4: 110-114
WOOLGAR, STEVE (198la) "Science as practical reasoning " Paper read at conference on
   Epistemologically Relevant Internalist Studies of Science, Maxwell School, Syracuse Uni-
   versity, 10-17 June
---- (1981b) "Documents and researcher interaction: some ways of making out what is
   happening in experimental science " Paper read at conference on Communication in Sci-
   ence Simon Fraser University, 1-2 September
290                                                              LABORATORY LIFE


WOOLGAR, STEVE (1982) "Laboratory Studies: a comment on the state of the art.' 1 Social
  Studies of Science 12: 481-498.
---- (1983) "Irony in the social study of science." Pp 239-266 in Knorr-Cetina and Mul-
  kay(1983)
---- (1984) "A kind of reflexivity " Paper read to Discourse and Reflexivity Workshop,
  University of Surrey, 13-14 September Forthcoming in Cultural Anthropology
---- (forthcoming) Science As Practical Reasoning: the practical management of episte -
  mological horror.
ZENZEN, M and RESTIVO, S (1982) "The mysterious morphology of immiscible liquids:
  a study of scientific practice." Social Science Information 21: 447-473.
                                          INDEX


Acceptance of a scientific fact, 108-110         Brazeau, P , 186, 204
Accreditation, 208                               Brillouin, L , 239-247, 259, 260
Adequatio rei et intellectus. 1 7 7              Budget, of the laboratory, 73, 90
Agonistic, 237                                   Bultmann, R , 169, 185
Althusser, L , 153, 230                          Burgus, R , 55, 139 ff
Amino acid analyser, definition, 60
Analog, cost, 70, definition, 61                 Callon, M , 42, 89, 206, 232, 258
Analogy, 169 ff                                  Capital, 230 (see credibility)
Anthropologist, 17, 20, 260; visit of the lab,   Career, 190 ff.
   43-90, 260                                    Chance and necessity, 249 ff
Anthropology of science, 20, 27-33               Chromatography, definition, 68, 89
Aristotle, 64                                    Circumstances, 239, 240, 243
Artefact, 60, 179                                Citation ratio, 74
Assay, 66                                        Citation spectra, 220 ff
Allan, H , 239, 244, 249                         Citations, use to study fact-construction,
Augé, M , 152, 260                                  127 ff
Automatic Peptide Synthesizer, 68                Claim, 78
                                                 Collective work, 188
Bachelard, G , 64, 90, 143, 150, 175, 186,       Collins, H , 175, 186, 239
   238, 258                                      Construction, 152, of facts, 236 ff , 240
Barnes, B., 23                                   Controversy, end and beginning, 182
Barthes, R 54, 150                               Conversation, among scientists, 154 ff
Bastide, F , 90, 184                             Conversion, from one credit to another, 198Beckman Instruments, 68                             201
Bell, Jocelyn, 32                                Conviction, 70
Berger, P L , 175                                Costa de Beauregard, O , 244
Bernal, J D , 230                                Craig, D ,65
Bernard, C , 230                                 Crane, D., 25, 26, 52,55
Beynon, J H , 68                                 Credibility, 194 ff , 238
Bhaskar, R , 178                                 Credit, 192 ff
Bibliometry, 55 ff , 72 ff                       CRF, Corticotropin Releasing Factors, 116,
Bioassay, 51, 64, 125                               140
Bitz, A ,40                                      Culture, of the laboratory, 53
Black, M , 173                                   Curriculum vitae, 208
Blackbox, 150, 259; Black-boxing, 242            Cycle, of credit, 200 ff
Bloor, D , 19, 23, 42, 136, 149, 174, 175,
   186, 197                                      Dagognet F , 88
Bogdanove, E , 113, 116                          Davis,M S , 232
Bole J , 145                                     De Certeau, M , 107
Bourdieu, P , 203 f f , 230, 232, 258            Deduction, sociology of, 136

                                                                                         291
292                                                                    LABORATORY L FE


Demand, for credible information, 201-208         Historicity, 239
Derrida, J., 88, 261                              History of science, 106-107
Description, constraints on the, 38, 44, 254      Hoagland, J , 230 n 5
Dietrich (pseudonym) his career, 194-198          Horton, R., 42
Discovery, 129, 173, 185                          Hoyle, F , 34, 35
Donohue, B , 171,243                              Hume, D , 15
Donovan, B. T., 116
Du Vigneaud, J , 117                              Idea, sociological deconstruction, 169
Ducrot, O., 90                                    Indexicality, 184 n 2
                                                  Industry of instruments, 68-69
Economic model, as seen by the scientists,        Informal communication, 52
   190 ff.; critique of the model, 192; mar-      Information, 246, its construction, 239 ff
  ket metaphor, 206 ff.                           Inscription device, definition, 51, 89, 245
Edge, D., 25, 27, 38, 90, 173                     Instrument, inventory of those present in the
Endorphin, 155                                       lab, 63 ff ; as reified theory, 66
                                                  Inversion, of nature and discourse, 177 ff
Fabbri, P, 85, 90
Fact, 70, defined as a final stage, 76 ff , 86;   Jacob, A., 249-251
   one case study, 105-150; and artefact,         Jutisz, P , 129
    174 ff
Falsification, 156                                Kant, E , 175
Fetishism 259 n 10                                Kawabata, Y , 247
Feyerabend, K., 251                               Knorr, K., 54, 150, 152, 173, 175, 184,
Fiction, 257, 261                                   230, 232, 236, 239, 251
Field (informant), 212 ff , 232                   Kuhn, T , 24
Flower, 154
Folkers, K., 145                                  Laboratory, final definition, 243
Forman, P., 152                                   Lacan, J , 168, 258
Foucault, M , 107, 184, 229, 251, 258             Lakatos, I., 89
                                                  Latour, B , 52, 62, 83, 85, 150, 176, 180,
Garfinkel, A , 153, 184                              231
Garvey, W. D., 52                                 Law, J , 25
Go, game of, 247 ff., 260                         Leatherdale, P , 173
Gopmk, M., 90                                     Lecourt, D., 152, 243
Greimas, A. J . , 7 7 , 90, 107, 184              Lehniger, 143
Griffith, B C , 52                                Lemaine, G., 40
Group, dynamics, 223 ff ; structure, 216 ff       Literature, 47 ff
Guillemin, R , 55, 105-150, 204; and              Local, character of science, 166
   Schally, their controversy, 11 ff , 131 ff     LRF (Luteinising releasing factor), 56
                                                  Luckman, T , 175
Habermas, J., 239                                 Lyotard, J. F., 150, 237
Hagstrom, W O , 52, 203 ff
Hard and soft, as a consequence of instru-        Machlup, F , 258
   ments, 66 ff ; Harder and softer, 142,         Marx, K , 179, 231, 259
   their difference, 257                          Mass spectrometer, 150; its role, 242, 259
Harris, G W , 116-118, 122                        Material and method, of the participant obHeidegger, M., 171                                  server, 40 ff.
Hesse, M., 173, 185                               Material and methods, of our study, 39-40
Index                                                                                     293

Materialisation, 238, 240                       Pincus, G , 230
Maxwell's devil, 244 ff , 254                   Plato, 186, 259
McCann, S M , 117, 125, 139                     Poincaré, R., 186
McKenzie, N , 149, 150                          Porath, J., 68
Medawar, P , 28, 42, 184                        Position, 210 ff.
Meites, J , 54, 56, 116, 141, 231 n 5           Price, D. J. 17, 52
Merrifield, R B , 68                            Programme, research programmes of the
Merton, T., 38                                     laboratory, 58 ff
Mitroff, I , 24, 168, 189                       Protein, 65
Modality, definition, 77; transformation of,    Publication list, 72-74
   81 ff                                        Pulsar, 34
Monod, J., 249-251                              Purification, definition, 59 ff
Morin, E , 251                                  Pyro-Glu-His-Pro-NH2, 110
Motivation, of scientists, 189 ff
MuJkay, M , 18, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 38, 55,     Radioimmunoassay, 64
   173, 189, 190                                Ravetz, J R , 28
Mullins, N , 25                                 Realism, 178
Mythology, 54 ff , 70                           Reality, 177, 180; consequence, not cause,
                                                   236-237; as a final secretion, 243; etyNational Institutes of Health (NIH), 139           mology, 260
Negotiation, 134, 156 ff                        Reasoning, 174
Network, of validity, 183, 186                  Reflexivity 18, 30, 252 ff
Neuroendocrinology, definition of the para-     Reification, 66, 127, 238, 242
  digm, 53 ff                                   Releasing factors, definition, 56
Nietzsche, 185,261                              Rescher, N., 258
Noise, 239 ff                                   Reward system, 193 ff
Norms, 24; and counternorms, 189, 205;          Rockefeller Institute, 65
   their social explanation, 229                Rose, H. & J., 152
                                                Routine, 69
Object, 177
Objectivity, 84-86, 158                         Sacks, H., 184
Observer, as a fictional character, 45, 88,     Sartre, J. P., 185, 238
  257; as a technician, 255 ff                  Serially, A , 55, 107 ff ; his strategy, 118
01by, R., 106                                   Scharrer, B., 54, 77
Operations, on the literature, 133 ff           Schibuzawa, A , 114; his strategy, 120 ff
Order from disorder, 239, 244 ff                Schreiber, F , 114;, his strategy, 121 ff
Orgel, L , 249                                  Schutz, A , 153
Originality, 233                                SCI (Science Citation Index), 86, 123, 255
Out-there-ness, 182                             Serres, M., 239, 261
Output of the laboratory, substances, 71-75     Shapin, S , 42
Outsider, 20; tempted by insiderness, 70; his   Signal, from noise, 127
   feelings, 256                                Singh, J , 239, 240, 244
                                                Smith, informant, 154 ff
Paradigm, 260                                   Small, H , 233
Pedersen, K. O., 65                             Social factors, as conceived by the scienPeptide, definition, 56, 70, 89                    tists, 19-22; as intrusion on normal work,
Phenomenon, constructed by the lab, 64             31; special meaning, 32, 152, 188
Phenomenotechnique 63 ff., 238                  Social/scientific, 21-27
294                                                                  LABORATORY LIFE


SohnRethel, A , 230, 259                       Trajectories, of career, 214 ff.
Somatostatin, 56                               Transformation, of statement types, 81-86
Specialty, scientific, 56; TRF case, 112 ff    Tucson meeting, 139 ff.
Spectrometer, NMR, 66                          Type of statements, definition, 76 ff
Spinoza, 183, 261
Splitting, between fact and statement of a     Vale, W , 55
   fact, 176 ff                                Visit of the laboratory, 43-90
Strategy, research strategy, 114 ff , 211 ff
Subjectivity, 84-86
Svedberg, T., 65                               Wade, N., 56, 139, 149
Swatez, G , 40                                 Watanaba, S , 246
Synthesis, chemical, definition, 61            Watson, J , 77, 89 171, 243
                                               Whitley, R D , 24, 259
Technicians, 217-223, 232                      Wilson (pseudonymn), informant, 154
Textbook, style, 77                            Wilson, B , 42
Thought process, 168 ff.                       Woolgar, S , 28, 33, 34, 173, 239
Thyrotropin Releasing Factor (Hormone)         Wynne, B , 28, 155
   [CTRF(H)], 107, 105-150, 163, 236 ff.
Tobey, R., 25                                  Yalow, R S , 64, 66
Todorov, T., 90                                Young, B , 230
